Improving Police ProductivityA response to the recommendations of the Policing Productivity Review.23 April 2024
© Crown Copyright 2024This publication is licensed under the terms of the Open Government Licence v3.0 except where otherwise stated. To view this licence, visit nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open- government-licence/version/3 or write to the Information Policy Team, The National Archives, Kew, London TW9 4DU, or email: psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk.Where we have identified any third party Copyright information you will need to obtain permission from the Copyright holders concerned.This publication is available at www.gov.uk/government/publications/policing-productivity- review.
ContentsMinisterial Foreword	4Productivity in Policing	6Why Policing Productivity Matters	6The Foundation for Improvement	6Driving Improvement through Science and Technology	10Police Workforce	12Barriers to Productivity	14Home Office Counting Rules	14Criminal Justice System (CJS)	14Mental Health Demand and Policing	15Looking Ahead	18
Ministerial ForewordImproving productivity across the public sector is a priority for this government. Maximising the value of every pound spent means focusing on the outcomes that matter the most to the public. Nowhere is this more important than in policing.Policing will receive up to £18.4 billion in 2024/25, and we have invested over £3 billion in recruiting an additional 20,000 officers since 2019. It is vital that the public get the full benefits of this investment. That means ensuring our police officers are able to do their jobs effectively and stripping away the unnecessary barriers they face. We welcome the ambition that policing has shown in the independent Review of Policing Productivity, which was published in the autumn of 2023.The Review identified many opportunities for policing to improve productivity, with the potential to save 38 million hours of police officer time every year. That would be the equivalent of another 20,000 officers on our streets. This is a challenging target, but we know that policing can rise to it, implement the Review’s recommendations, and realise the potential benefits. We want to see police officers focused on core policing, catching criminals, and protecting the public.The Government has an important part to play in this. This response sets out what we are doing. We are going further than the Review recommended, demonstrating the strength of our commitment to improving productivity and outcomes. As set out at Spring Budget, the Government has committed an additional £234 million, over four years, to the improvement of police productivity.This will bring our additional investment into technology and innovation within policing in 2024/25 to over £65 million. It includes measures such as facial recognition, drones as first responders, redaction, rapid video response, automated triage of 101 calls, knife detection, and robotic process automation. It will also help prepare policing for both the challenges and benefits bought by advances in artificial intelligence.We will create a new Centre for Police Productivity, based in the College of Policing. This will be established from autumn 2024 and will set the foundations necessary for policing to deliver the 38 million police officer hours identified by the independent review.This Centre will include a new Policing Data Hub to support police forces’ use of data and ensure they can deploy and get the benefits from new technology, including AI. It will also deliver new model processes into policing that was trialled during this Review. Adopting ’what works’ through model processes will mean better outcomes for the public at less cost.Government and policing must demonstrate the benefits of investment in policing. The new Centre for Police Productivity will work with policing to implement the
recommendations of the Review, identify and drive new opportunities and evaluate the progress made in delivering the 38 million hours.Public confidence in policing must improve. People need not only to be safe but to feel safe. The Review acknowledged that improving productivity is pivotal to this endeavour, by getting back to core policing and improving outcomes for the public. New technology and innovation not only allows officers to spend more time doing the job they should do, but also allows the public to get the right information or support when they need it.Policing is a unique job; it offers continuous challenges, and the results always matter. We want to maximise the efficiency and productivity of the service which focuses on the things that are important and deliver safety for the public. This is what is represented by the Review’s recommendations, and we look forward to working with policing to deliver on them.
Rt Hon James Cleverly MP Home Secretary      
Rt Hon Chris Philp MP Minister of State for Crime, Policingand FireApril 2024
Productivity in PolicingWhy Policing Productivity MattersImproving productivity will enable policing to make the most effective use of its available resources. It will ensure that police officers can carry out their core roles of preventing, and detecting crime, and keeping the public safe without being burdened by unproductive tasks or procedures. This will improve public confidence in policing, which is why productivity is important to the Government. The public will not only be safer, but they will feel safe as well.The Policing Productivity Review was published on 20 November 2023. It identified 26 cross-cutting recommendations that, if implemented in full, would free up around 38 million hours of police time per year within five years. This equates to over 20,000 police officers. The review also identified that a long-term shift in the culture of policing would be required to deliver this change. It will need to move to embrace greater collaboration in trialling and rolling out new technologies, identifying and adopting best practices, and sharing and exploiting data between forces.We believe the leadership of policing are ready to embrace this challenge and understand that doing so will be necessary to adapt to changes in demand and ensure the sector is able to fully exploit fast-paced improvements in technology, characterised by innovations in areas such as AI and automation. The Government will continue to support policing to do this as set out in this response to the Review.The Foundation for ImprovementThe Review recognised that there is a need within policing to identify best practice, make the necessary changes to implement it effectively, evaluate the impact of doing so, and measure the success. To enable these key actions to be effectively and consistently carried out, the Government has decided to set up a new Centre for Police Productivity. This will be based in the College of Policing but will be focused on driving forward the recommendations of the review and be responsible for overseeing the delivery of an additional 38 million hours of operational policing time.The Centre will lead delivery of change across policing, working with Police and Crime Commissioners (PCCs), Chief Constables, His Majesty's Inspectorate of Constabulary and Fire & Rescue Services (HMICFRS) and other parts of the College of Policing. It will be tasked with driving improvement and effective practice in policing, in line with the College’s core remit and headed by a new Executive Director, supported by ring-fenced funding.The Centre will focus on supporting forces to deliver tangible productivity improvements, including those enabled by technology and innovation. It will develop force level reporting arrangements and evaluation to ensure forces are demonstrating the value of investments.
It will also provide police forces access to expertise in operational improvement and enhancing data exploitation capabilities.Cross-cutting Productivity Improvements, Informed by High Quality DataThere is a range of work already in progress to drive data improvement, which spans the National Police Chiefs’ Council (NPCC), Association of Police and Crime Commissioners (APCC), College of Policing, and Police Digital Service (PDS). Significant improvements have already been made to police workforce data as a result of the Police Uplift Programme and this has been important in supporting the NPCC’s annual Strategic Assessment of Workforce.The Home Office agrees that these improvements should be sustained and built into business as usual for policing going forward and can confirm it will go further in delivering this.Developing Model ProcessesThe Home Office is grateful to the Review Team for their work to examine how the model- process approach to identifying what works at sector level and enabling this to be applied in a way that enables policing to better understand productivity and make sound decisions on the use of police time. The greater understanding of the benefits of alternative processes and overall drivers of performance, combined with the inherent sharing of best practice and the opportunity to enhance cost analysis and comparison between forces provides a clear opportunity for policing.The Review estimated that over 3.4 million officer hours could potentially be saved if all 43 police forces were to use the model process tool to move their models to the most cost- efficient for antisocial behaviour and burglary demands. The Home Office is keen to see this work expanded and for the new Centre for Police Productivity to ensure that the benefits estimated are realised as part of their work to support policing to identify what works and deliver change.The Home Office agree that the Police Activity Survey should be repeated, and that participation should be extended. However, there are concerns about repeating the survey
every six months due to the time and costs burden on police officers. The data from the survey is also not expected to change this rapidly, given the need for process reform and improvement to see significant shifts. The Home Office agree that the potential of technology to reduce the burden on officers completing the survey should be examined and the long-term ambition should be to create effective benchmarking of productivity that is regularly updated to allow forces to change and improve the way they operate.Enhancing the Strategic Approach to PolicingCreating a Centre for Police Productivity is a key step in advancing the understanding of the outputs and outcomes of policing. PCCs have a statutory role to secure efficient and effective police service in their area, and APCC have been supporting PCCs in this role, including the development of new guidance, and in setting policing strategy. We anticipate that the insights gained through the Centre will support policing, particularly the APCC and the NPCC in their role supporting Chief Officers, in shaping their ongoing strategic approach towards demand, capabilities, and collaboration.The Home Office agree that there may be value in bringing together cross sector representation to help tackle shared strategic issues to enable senior level conversations and encourage join up and better engagement between partners, as is already the case with the Drugs Strategy Ministerial forum.The Government is also clear that the New Burdens doctrine applies to policing as a local authority, where they are required to do something new or additional beyond fulfilling their existing roles. This should be done in consultation with the sector considering the productivity implications of any new expectation on policing.
The Role of Organisations that Review or Inspect PolicingHMICFRS and the Independent Office for Police Conduct (IOPC) have a crucial role to play in ensuring that policing in England and Wales can maintain their high standard of service to the public, whilst identifying areas in which improvements can be made.
Driving Improvement through Science and TechnologyInvestment in TechnologyThe Home Office acknowledges the opportunities that new and innovative technology could bring to policing and will be providing an uplift of over £65 million in policing innovation and technology budgets in 2024/25, enabling piloting and roll out of new technology for the police in England and Wales. This technology will improve productivity by allowing police officers to spend less time on admin and more time on frontline duties.Many of the innovations we will be funding were highlighted by the Review. These include Facial Recognition; automating data-processing tasks via Robotic Process Automation; automating the redaction of personal information from video and audio; automating the preparation of digital evidence for case files; automating vetting checks for officer recruits; and enabling the interviewing of witnesses and victims by Rapid Video Response video call, allowing them to share information sooner and more discreetly than in person.The Government is also going beyond the Review’s recommendations and is developing and assessing a wide variety of other technologies which can improve productivity.This investment will also establish a fund to support police forces’ most promising AI projects for improving productivity. All use of AI by Policing will be subject to the Covenant for Using AI in Policing that was endorsed by the NPCC in September 2023.The Home Office also continues to provide other existing funding, including £9.5 million to deliver science and technology (S&T) development and advice to policing in 2024/25.Developing Technology Capability within PolicingPolicing is already making good progress towards exploring and adopting innovative technologies, for example the creation of an Authorised Professional Practice document by the College of Policing on Technology, and the development of an AI Covenant for Policing by the Police Chief Scientific Advisor. It will be important to ensure alignment with existing assurance activities in this area to avoid duplication and for policing to note the strategic direction of the UK’s national laboratories.
The Home Office will also continue to provide active leadership to ensure policing has a regulatory and legislative framework that enables technological innovation and use, for example through its sponsorship of the Biometric and Forensics Ethics Group.The Home Office agree that it needs to be easier for forces to adopt new science and technology-based solutions at pace. That is why the Home Office is investing in co- ordination activity across policing, by funding elements of the NPCC such as the Police Chief Scientific Advisor’s office. More generally, the Home Office provides national capabilities funding to accelerate adoption at a national level of technologies that have been successfully demonstrated locally. The vast majority of technology adoption, however, is a matter for policing, as policing is operationally independent. This includes activities associated with technology adoption such as the running of the new NPCC Science and Innovation Coordination Committee.The Home Office also note the Review Team’s recommendation for a clear people strategy to support policing in ensuring the right talent and skills mix to maintain and improve on the sector’s scientific and technical capacity. The NPCC Science and Technology Strategy has already set out how the NPCC will invest in its people, championing S&T literacy across all of policing.Continued financial support from the Home Office to the Police Chief Scientific Adviser has enabled the creation of a network of research and innovation leads across forces, and in collaboration with industry, the establishing of a Police and Industry Charter setting out how policing and industry will work together.
Police WorkforcePolice Officer Deployment and WelfareThe Government is clear that police officers should be tackling crime and serving the public. The Home Office expect PCCs to work with their Chief Constables, who are responsible for operational decisions relating to their forces, to make the most effective use of their resources and funding.Following successful delivery of the Police Uplift Programme, the Government has continued to work with forces to maintain officer numbers at uplift levels. The Home Office expects each police force to maintain a robust workforce plan which will ensure they can continue to deploy resources effectively to serve and support communities’ current, and future, needs. As part of that workforce plan, there should be appropriate focus on recognition of strong officer performance and the role that plays in retention.The Home Office anticipate a key part of this planning will involve the use of warranted police officers in roles which require their powers and expertise, and the use of appropriate specialised civilian staff, and innovative technological solutions, to effectively deliver the administrative and auxiliary functions of policing.When looking at deployability, the Home Office wants to ensure forces are doing all they can to support officers on recuperative or adjusted duties – many of whom may simply require workplace adjustments to reoccupy frontline roles. In 2015, new legislation and national guidance was brought in to ensure forces and their occupational health departments better manage sick and injured officers.The Home Office continues to work closely with the Review team and other policing partners (including NPCC, College of Policing, HMICFRS, the Chief Medical Officer for Policing and the Police Federation of England and Wales (PFEW)) to ensure that forces have the data and best practice required to make informed decisions on how best to deploy their workforce and manage the level of sickness absence. The Centre for Police Productivity will be critical in ensuring forces own and use high quality data to support these decisions in the future.
Investing in Training and PeopleThe delivery of training in each police force remains the responsibility of individual chief officers and PCCs, in line with the needs and priorities specific to the communities within their force area. The College of Policing has the power to mandate qualifications for the appointment and promotion of police officers and set probation periods. HMICFRS should inspect forces against standards set by the College of Policing.
Barriers to ProductivityHome Office Counting RulesThe Home Office thank the Review Team for the progress update in December 2023 on the impact of the changes the Home Office made earlier that year and are confident that the second phase of the work will help to improve the system further to the benefit of both police and the public.The Home Office agree with the Review’s recommendation that HMICFRS’ crime data integrity inspections should reflect the most up-to-date development in the Home Office’s counting rules, and are pleased that these changes have already been incorporated by the Inspectorate.Criminal Justice System (CJS)The Home Office has recently concluded projects seeking to understand the reasons why some case files are rejected, and continues to work with partners to identify opportunities to streamline the pre-charge file build process (where a guilty plea is anticipated). Both projects were undertaken in conjunction with the NPCC and with the support of the National Criminal Justice Coordination Committee. The Home Office will work with partners including the Crown Prosecution Service (CPS) to take forward recommendations from this work.Alongside this, the Independent Review of Disclosure (Part 1) will assess the operation of the disclosure regime, as set out the in Criminal Procedure and Investigations Act 1996 and Criminal Justice Act 2003, review the guidelines on disclosure, and consider legislative and non-legislative modifications that could improve the regime. Work is also ongoing to strengthen and promote the use of Criminal Justice Units and flexible communication between police and CPS prosecutors.The Review Team’s findings are that a change in charging authority could enable more timely charging decisions. This approach could result in an increase in the number of cases charged, which could in turn lead to decreased levels of victim attrition, improvements in victim satisfaction, and an overall increase to public confidence in the CJS. However, the benefits of any change in charging authority need to be fully tested prior to adoption. It will be crucial that there is careful consideration of the impact of increases in charging upon other partners and on victims’ experience of the CJS.
The Home Office recognise that over time the redaction burden on policing has significantly increased. The Home Office has been working closely with the NPCC, CPS, Ministry of Justice (MoJ) and the Attorney General’s Office to explore ways of addressing this. This includes funding new technology, improved processes, updated guidance, and changes to legislation.The Home Office are keen to see collaboration continue across the sector, building on the work already completed, ensuring understanding where priorities and success measures align. The National Criminal Justice Coordination Committee is seeking, as part of its Improvement Plan, to agree a series of improvement measures for policing. The Home Office will work closely with the National Team, CPS and Joint Operational Improvement Board to ensure these measures are proportionate and aligned, and will also need to ensure measures do not encourage perverse incentives.Mental Health Demand and PolicingThe two mental health ‘sprints’ carried out by the Policing Productivity Review team made a series of recommendations relating to mental health and policing, which are considered below.The National Partnership Agreement (NPA) on the Right Care, Right Person (RCRP) approach (July 2023), signed by the Home Office, Department of Health and Social Care, NHS England (NHSE) and national policing bodies, applies the RCRP approach to mental health-related incidents in England. Similar partnership work is underway in Wales. All territorial police forces have committed to introduce RCRP.At the time of publication, a majority of police forces across England and Wales report having introduced at least one phase of the wider RCRP approach. The Home Office and Department of Health and Social Care are monitoring and evaluating the rollout of RCRP.
Implementation of the NHS Long Term Plan (LTP) ambition of having age-appropriate 24/7 mental health crisis lines accessible via NHS 111 by April 2024 is well underway. People experiencing a mental health crisis in all areas of the country are able to access telephone support and face-to-face assessments where needed, with these lines receiving over 200,000 calls per month. From the end of April, these services will be accessible via a simple and memorable number - NHS 111 ‘select mental health option’.The NHS is delivering a substantial expansion in community crisis services, including growing the workforce. In 2016, the total national staffing in adult community crisis services was 5,104 WTE (whole time equivalents). By 2022, it had more than doubled to 10,488 WTE.Other improvements and investments have been made to support someone in a mental health crisis. 100% of hospitals with a type 1 Emergency Department have a 24/7 liaison service (on site or via in-reach), which is a specialist service providing mental health care in a physical health setting, and 77% of services are commissioned at ‘core 24’1 or an approved equivalent, exceeding the LTP target of 70% by 2023/24.The Government is also investing £150 million in capital funding for new projects to support mental health crisis response and urgent mental health care. This includes £7 million for mental health ambulances and £143 million on alternative options to A&E and inpatient care for people requiring urgent mental health care. This investment will fund over 200 schemes, with over 100 already complete and over 60 more expected to be completed by this winter. In addition, 51 Mental Health Ambulances have been ordered in 2023/24 and 37 in 2024/25 (a total of 88).The Government is pleased to see that the NPCC’s Mental Health and Policing Strategy 2022-25 includes recording and reporting data as a priority, and that the guidance toolkit on RCRP includes a module on baselining of data. The NPCC’s mental health portfolio will continue to monitor improvements to data quality as a Strategy objective. Guidance products for health and social care partners, which have been produced by NHSE and DHSC respectively, encourage multi-agency partners to work collaboratively to identify what data is useful to collect, to agree legally compliant mechanisms for sharing data and to use this data to inform implementation decisions.The NPCC has produced guidance for police forces on the Multi-agency Response for Adults Missing from Health and Care Settings: National Framework for England and is committed to implementing that framework in the manner set out in that guidance. Much of the substance of the guidance has been incorporated into the guidance produced by NPCC and the College of Policing on RCRP. The approach set out in the Multi-agency Response for Adults Missing from Health and Care Settings: National Framework for1 A liaison mental health service model provided 24 hours, 7 days a week, commonly provided across urgent and emergency care pathways.
England is referenced and reinforced in new guidance on implementing RCRP aimed at health and social care partners, which will be published shortly by NHSE and DHSC respectively.The Government's Draft Mental Health Bill set out ways in which the Mental Health Act 1983 could be updated. The Government has carefully considered the Joint Committee’s pre-legislative scrutiny report on the draft Bill, and our response has recently been published. Although it has not been possible to include the Bill in the legislative programme for the current parliamentary session, the Government intends to bring forward a Mental Health Bill when parliamentary time allows. In the meantime, the Government continues to take forward non-legislative commitments to improve the care and treatment of people detained under the Act.
Looking AheadProductivity in PolicingThe Home Office recognises how the Policing Productivity Review Team brought together experience and expertise from across the sector and are keen to continue to make use of the relationships, trust, and insight the team have developed. The Home Office have asked the Review team to continue to examine areas such as the police response to Missing Persons, Case File Quality and Police Investigations as part of implementation of the Review.Improving Police ProductivityThe Home Office commissioned the Policing Productivity Review in August 2022 in response to concerns about police time being taken up by unproductive administrative tasks and other non-police work. When the Review was published in November 2023 it represented a clear opportunity to improve police productivity and free up the 38 million hours of police time the Review Team had identified. Giving this time back to police officers will allow them to concentrate on their core mission of protecting the public and preventing and detecting crime.The Home Office recognises the role that all parts of policing have to take forward the Review’s recommendations, expecting them to look beyond the recommendations where necessary, and to make the changes, adaptions, and improvements needed to free up this time and allow police officers to concentrate on their core role, delivering the service the public deserve, and that officers want to provide.Government has demonstrated its commitment to achieving this by investing an uplift of over £65 million in 2024/25 to help policing to reach this goal. The Centre for Police Productivity will strengthen the coordination and delivery of productivity improvements and the funding provided by government will enable the piloting and roll-out of innovative technology that will improve productivity and free up police time.The Government has invested in the foundation for change and is looking to policing, to the NPCC, APCC, and Chief Officers across England and Wales, to make the most of this investment and the opportunities presented by the Review’s recommendation


Preventing youth violence and gang involvementPractical advice for schools and colleges

ContentsIntroduction	4What does the law say about youth violence and	8teachers’ powers?Preventing violence	9Understanding the issue Seeking supportWorking with other local partners to address the issue Primary schools and early interventionRisk factorsWhat works in preventing violence in schools and colleges	17Who to involveEvidence on general approaches Sources of evidenceAssessing specific programmesTargeting a programme, or developing a new oneResource A: Legal powers	20Staff powers Joint enterpriseGangs, firearms and knivesResource B: What works in preventing violence and	23aggressive behaviour?Resource C: Repositories of evidence (evaluated and new/	30developing programmes) and other resources for schoolsResource D: How do you know if a programme has been	38effective in the past?Resource E: What if there is no specific evidence, or the	40programme is new?
The vast majority of young people and education establishments will not be affected by serious violence or gangs. However, where these problems do occur there will almost certainly be a significant impact.Schools, both primary and secondary, and colleges have a duty and a responsibility to protect their pupils and students. It is also well established that success in learning is one of the mostpowerful indicators in the prevention of youth crime.1 Dealing with violence also helps attainment.2While pupils and students generally see educational establishments as safe places, even low levels of youth violence can have a disproportionate impact on any educationalestablishment. Schools and colleges are places where important interventions can take place to prevent negative behaviour, such as young people carrying a knife.Primary schools are also increasingly recognised as places where early warning signs that younger children may be at risk of getting involved in gangs can be spotted. Crucial preventive work can be done at this stage to prevent negative behaviour from escalating and becoming entrenched. Programmes such as Families and Schools Together, Positive Action or the Good Behaviour Game are aimed to improve social and emotional skills, understanding risk, exploring how to stay safe and make safe choices.Whilst schools and colleges may face different specific challenges and operate in different contexts, many of the issues they face will be similar.
In schools specifically, one of the four key judgements that Ofsted inspectors will make is on the behaviour and safety of pupils. In order for a school to be judged ‘outstanding’, all groups of pupils must:ï feel safe at school all the time;ï understand very clearly what unsafe situations are; andï be highly aware of how to keep themselves and others safe.Inspections will include a consideration of pupils’ ability to assess and manage risk appropriately. This explicitly includes online safety, substance misuse, knives and gangs, and relationships (including sexual relationships).Ofsted inspectors also judge schools on pupils’ behaviour towards, and respect for, other young people and adults. This includes freedom from bullying, including cyber-bullying, harassment and discrimination. Assessment of schools will focus on bullying related to special educational needs, sexualorientation, sex, race, religion and belief, gender reassignment,or disability, as defined in the Equality Act 2010.
Preventing violence in schools and colleges can require a mix of universal, targeted or specialist interventions. School and college leaders should be able to:ï develop skills and knowledge to resolve conflict as partof the curriculum;ï challenge aggressive behaviour in ways that prevent the recurrence of such behaviour;ï understand risks for specific groups, including thosethat are gender-based, and target interventions;ï safeguard, and specifically organise child protection,when needed;ï carefully manage individual transitions between educational establishments, especially into Pupil Referral Units (PRUs) or alternative provision; andï work with local partners to prevent anti-social behaviour or crime.Crucial preventive work can be done at this stage to prevent negative behaviour from escalating and becoming entrenched, such as programmes aimed to improve social and emotional skills or programmes which help children understand risk and make safe choices.
This guidance, which has been produced as part of thecross-Government work on Ending Gang and Youth Violence3, is intended as a resource upon which schools and colleges can draw. It includes:ï advice on the support available to address problems of youth violence or gangs;ï a summary of what works in preventing violence;ï some considerations when commissioning programmes to improve outcomes for young people; andï a set of resources and practical checklists.The guidance signposts school and college staff to resources:ï providing the skills and support to help young people to resist becoming involved in violence;ï identifying young people in need of help; andï working with other agencies to tackle violence.ï 
Teachers have a range of powers in relation to discipline. These are there to protect teachers as they tackle problems, including violence, in the school environment. Such powers cover disciplinary actions, the power to restrain violent pupils, and the power to search pupils for prohibited items.There are also some legal issues that teachers should be aware of that relate to gang membership, in particular concerning the potential criminal liability of young people whose presence or actions lead to a crime, even if they did not commit the crime themselves (‘joint enterprise’). This highlights the risks for young people of gang involvement, even if they think that they have not directly committed any crimes.An overview of the relevant powers and legislation is attached atResource A.
In order to tackle violence affecting schools or colleges and the community, it is important to:ï understand the problems that young people are facing both in school/college and in their local community;ï consider possible avenues of support; andï work with local partners (who may have valuable information, resources or expertise).Leaders and senior teams in schools and colleges should also recognise that ‘early intervention’ includes anti-bullying and a curriculum that ensures that young people develop the social and emotional skills they need in order to meet their full potential. For example, the curriculum should include teaching conflict resolution skills, understanding risky situations, and violence andabuse should be clearly defined so that young people know whento seek help.Understanding the issueIt is important to understand fully the issue or issues that affect the local area. In-depth analysis of the issues should highlight areas for action by bringing together information about:ï the scale and nature of youth violence;ï who is involved;ï what may already be in place to help young people; andï where there may be gaps.Engaging with the local community safety partnership, the youth offending team, the Safer School Partnership officer or the neighbourhood police team can assist schools if there is a gang or youth violence problem in their area.
Working with local partners will help to achieve a full understanding of the context that school and college staff work in, especially how community issues affect behaviours in the school or college. Additionally, school councils may offer an opportunity to engage with pupils on this issue.As part of their emergency management planning, schools should have in place systems for targeting and responding to individual or group violence. Even if violent incidents themselves do not appear to be an immediate concern, there may be a need to build resilience to such problems for the future.Seeking supportParents, carers, family members and other adults in children’s lives such as teachers have an incredibly important role to play in helping protect them from gangs and to keep them away from violence. But it can be difficult to know what to do.Anyone worried about a child or young person involved in, or at risk from, gangs can call the NSPCC helpline on 0808 800 5000. Helpline practitioners have been trained as part of the Home Office Ending Gang and Youth Violence programme, and can offer advice, support and information on what action to take to help young people who are in, or at risk from, a gang.Local headteacher networks are the most common way to share ideas, practice and support. Schools can link with local support groups and specialist agencies with experience in dealing with gang-related issues. If the school or college is in an ’Ending Gang and Youth Violence’ priority area4, there is likely to be someone with a role in relation to gangs who will be in a position to provide specialist support within either the local authority or the police.Please see the information on community safety partnerships in ‘Working with other local partners to address the issue’ below.
There is also a range of resources on what works. These are outlined below in the section on Sources of Evidence. The Department for Education (DfE) has published a range of advice on behaviour, attendance and bullying. For example, the Government’s former expert adviser on behaviour, Charlie Taylor, has produced a checklist on the basics of classroommanagement.5 Teachers can use this to develop between five andten essential actions to encourage good behaviour in pupils.The Department for Education has produced advice for parents (November 2014) on how to protect their child from being cyber- bullied. It provides advice and information about how they can protect their child from cyberbullying and how to tackle it if it happens.The DfE has also produced advice on bullying in 2011 and this was updated in 2014.6 The advice summarises:ï schools’ legal obligations and powers;ï the general principles adopted by successful schools; andï specialist organisations that can provide help.There is also a range of resources available to address wider violence issues that affect young people, such as ‘sexting’ and relationship abuse. These are listed in Resource C under ‘Other resources for schools’.
Working with other local partners to address the issueDealing with gang or youth violence issues in an area is a shared responsibility for the community and partner agencies. Schools or colleges affected by these issues will be able to draw advice and support from their local partners, such as the police, youth offending teams, other local authority teams or the voluntary andcommunity sector. The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB) may also have a strategy to address these issues.The work of the local community safety partnership will provide key support. For example, the partnership may be able to:ï give advice on whether there are any safer communities’ activities currently underway and what the school or college might do to complement, support or interact with them;ï keep schools/colleges informed about the numerous ways that gang members can control, intimidate and or influence pupils in the school/college environment;ï identify young people who are subject to court orders and what schools/colleges may need to know;ï manage an ‘alert’ system on local problems that may affect the school/college or put young people at risk;ï offer specialist advice on particular problems, for example, gang-associated girls;ï 
If the school or college is in an ’Ending Gang and Youth Violence’ area, the Community Safety Manager will be able to put school/ college staff in touch with the local agency that takes the lead on gathering information about the gangs operating in the area.
Primary schools and early interventionEvidence shows that early-stage intervention is an effective strategy for preventing children becoming involved in violence, crime or antisocial behaviour later in life.Primary schools, working with local partners, can play an important role in understanding and spotting the warning signs amongst younger children. Where appropriate, head teachers may find it useful to engage with local early help/early intervention teams in order to discuss concerns about pupils and plan appropriate interventions. Early intervention teams are based in every local authority. Their role is to work with safeguarding teams to identify early signs of problems and work with children and families to prevent problems from escalating.Providing the right support whilst a child is still in primary school can protect those vulnerable to exploitation by older gang members and those who are at risk of being drawn furtherinto violent or negative behaviour over time. It is good practice for schools to work together to take preventative measuresto support the younger siblings of gang members. It is also advisable for primary schools in areas affected by gang and youth violence issues to work with younger children to strengthen social and emotional skills, build resilience to negative influences, and develop an ability to understand risk and risky situations.Example programmes are available from the Early Intervention Foundation. These include the PATHS Curriculum, which is a school-based programme that aims to improve emotional and social competencies in primary school children. More information on early intervention strategies to prevent gang and youth violence is available from the Early Intervention Foundation at Resource C or www.eif.org.uk/social-and-emotional-learning/.
Risk FactorsPrimary school teachers will wish to be aware of some of the most significant risk factors for primary school age children. The Early Intervention Foundation have looked at the quantitative data around risk factors and identified the factors at different agesthat are the most predictive of a) youth violence and b) gang involvement, and we have summarised these in the table below.Risk factors strongly associated with youth violence, gang involvement and factors that overlap in their association with youth violence and gang involvementFactorStrong risk factors for youth violence (age group)Strong risk factors for gang involvement (age group)Child* Troublesome (7-9;10-12)* High daring (10-12)* Positive attitude towards delinquency (10-12)* Previously committed offences (7-9)* Involved in anti-socialbehaviour (10-12)* Substance use (7-9)* Aggression (7-9)* Running away andtruancy (7-9; 10-12)* Marijuana use (10-12)Child’s Family* Disrupted family (7-9; 10-12)* Poor supervision(10-12)
FactorStrong risk factors for youth violence (age group)Strong risk factors for gang involvement (age group)School* Low academic achievement in primary school (10-12)* Learning disability(10-12)Child’s peer Group* Peers involved in crime and/or anti- social behaviour (7-9; 10-12)Community* Marijuana availability(10-12)* Children and young people in the neighbourhood involved in crime and/or anti-social behaviour (10-12)The table is designed to highlight potential risk factors but it still depends on the individual circumstances and development of the child. There may be other factors present that determine whether that particular child will become involved in gang or youth violence. Similarly a child may be subject to some of the risks factors that have been identified, but they do not become involved in gang or youth violence because of other influences in their life.
Young people’s involvement in violence is not a new problem. Lots of approaches to tackling this issue have already been tried, and some have been successful. Knowing about these can help leaders and managers of schools and colleges to decide how to prevent the problem, while achieving maximum value for money (based on evidence of what works) and improving the chances of success.Who to involveA key issue before choosing a programme is whether to aim it at all pupils/students, at a small group, or at individuals. It isimportant to understand any specific issues and recognise that different groups (for example, boys and girls) can experience violence in different ways. While a universal programme may be simpler to implement, it may miss some of the more nuanced aspects of violence that affect particular groups or individuals. Some approaches may also be more suited to a targeted approach than others (for example, cognitive behavioural therapy versus social development programmes), which might shape considerations.Evidence on general approachesSome approaches to preventing violence have been extensively evaluated, but others have less evidence of effectiveness and so should be approached with caution. Mentoring, anti-bullying
programmes, improving social skills, involving parents and cognitive behavioural therapy all have good evidence of success when applied appropriately. Resource B provides a summaryof the evidence, highlighting approaches that have worked and those where the evidence of success is more limited.Sources of evidenceThere is a range of sources that provide details of the many particular programmes that might be used to tackle violence and problem behaviour in schools and colleges, see Resource C. The websites also provide information on a number of programmes that are currently being evaluated, and so do not yet have results. The approaches included below indicate the effectiveness of some of the main types of programme.Assessing specific programmesEducational establishments may have to assess evidence from specific programmes that follow one or more of the general approaches above in order to choose one that is likely to be successful for them. There are a number of key questions to consider when assessing whether particular programmes have been effective.ï what is the specific outcome needed for this group or individual?ï what evidence is there that a programme has achieved this outcome?ï what preparation work, parental permission and follow-up work will be needed?A simple checklist of questions to ask is attached at Resource D.
Targeting a programme, or developing a new oneThere may be a need to tailor a more general approach or even commission a programme that does not have a clearly established history of success in order to address a specificproblem. But even where there is little research to go on, there are still some key aspects to consider, including:ï identifying a specific issue;ï targeting the right ages/stage of development; andï understanding the causes of the problem.Resource E includes a simple checklist.
Staffi powersTeachers have a number of legal powers to manage pupils’ behaviour and impose discipline. The main ones arelisted below.ï A statutory power to discipline pupils, which includes the power to issue detentions and to confiscate inappropriate items (Education and Inspections Act 2006). The Department for Education’s (DfE’s) advice for head teachers and school staff on the power to discipline can be found via the following link: www.education.gov.uk/schools/pupilsupport/behaviour/ behaviourpolicies/f0076803/behaviour-and-discipline-in- schools-a-guide-for-headteachers-and-school-staffï A statutory power to use reasonable force to control or restrain pupils (Education and Inspections Act 2006). The DfE’s advice to schools on this power is available via the following link: www.education.gov.uk/schools/pupilsupport/behaviour/ behaviourpolicies/f0077153/use-of-reasonable-forceï A power to search pupils without consent for a number of ‘prohibited items’. These include:- knives and weapons;- alcohol, illegal drugs and stolen items;- tobacco and cigarette papers;- fireworks;i ‘Member of staff’, in relation to a school, means any teacher who works at the school and any other person who, with the authority of the head teacher, has lawful control or charge of pupils at the school as defined in the Education Act 1996 (www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/1996/56/ section/550A)i 
- pornographic images;- any article that the member of staff reasonably suspects has been, or is likely to be, used to commit an offence, cause personal injury or damage to property; and- any item banned by the school rules that has been identifiedin these rules as an item that may be searched for.The DfE’s advice to schools on the power to search can be viewed via the following link: www.education.gov.uk/schools/ pupilsupport/behaviour/behaviourpolicies/f0076897/screening,- searching-and-confiscationï A power for schools and local authorities to use parenting contracts and seek court-imposed parenting orders relating to children’s behaviour (strengthened by the Education and Inspections Act 2006). Advice on this issue is included in theDfE’s advice on school attendance (link below) www.education. gov.uk/schools/pupilsupport/behaviour/attendance/ a00216341/advice-on-school-attendance.Joint enterpriseIf a child’s presence or actions lead to a crime they could be charged with the same offence as the main offender. For example, if the child provided support or encouragement to a fellow gang member who committed a robbery or killed someone, they too could be charged with murder. Further support is available from the Home Office and details are provided in Resource C.Gangs, firearms and knivesFor more information about the law, visit the gov.uk websites at:www.gov.uk/find-out-if-i-can-buy-or-carry-a-knife www.gov.uk/import-controls-on-offensive-weapons
The law focuses on criminal behaviour. If an offender was or is part of a group or a gang, this may lead to a longer sentence.ï It is illegal to carry a knife in a public place, even if it belongs to someone else.ï It is also illegal to carry a folding pocketknife if the edge of the blade exceeds 3 inches (7.6 cm).ï It is illegal to carry a pocketknife if the blade can be locked.ï It is illegal to carry any knife, including folding knives, if there is intent to use it as a weapon, even if it belongs to someone else.ï The maximum sentence for possessing a knife in a public place without a good excuse has been increased from two to four years.ï It is illegal to keep any prohibited firearm, or to carry any firearm – including an imitation – in public, even if it is being carried for someone else.ï The minimum sentence for unlawful possession of a prohibited firearm is three years for 16- to17-year-olds and five years for adults, with a maximum sentence of 10 years.ï Police can and will search someone if they believe they are carrying a gun, knife or other weapon.ï Police and school staff can also search young people for weapons at school.ï 
Approaches with strong evidence of success8MentoringMentoring (where a mentor works closely with an individualto give advice, and help to identify and solve problems) can prevent futurebehavioural problems, if it is done well* More regular contact, longer contacts, and combining with other supportive interventions appear to make mentoring more effective.9* However, the research suggests that caution should be taken when implementing mentoring programmes. Poorly implemented mentoring programmes (for example, unstructured mentoring, or with unmotivated or otherwise unsuitable mentors) can make things worse.* The Early Intervention Foundation, in collaboration with the Home Office, has published advice on mentoring. The ‘Advice for Those Commissioning Mentoring Programmes’, provides practical, evidence- based guidance for commissioners and practitioners to maximise the positive impact of any local mentoring provision, and minimise the likelihood of ineffective or unintentionally harmful practice.
Bullying preventionAnti-bullying programmes (for example, the Olweus Bullying Prevention Programme and KiVa10) can reduce reported victimisation* There are many elements of different anti- bullying programmes that are seen as effective, and strategies such as proactive peer support and reactive anti-bullying school-based strategies have been rated as moderately effective by practitioners.* The most successful programmes include: involving parents; using disciplinary methods; and high duration and intensity programmes.* However, some types of peer involvement (peer mediation, peer mentoring or peer group pressure as bystanders) as part of an anti- bullying programme may actually increase victimisation.11Improving social skillsImproving social skills can strengthen school attachment and raise achievement, and can also reduce anti-social/ aggressive behaviour and prevent future violence* Social development programmes can involve managing anger, modifying behaviour, adopting a social perspective, moral development, building social skills, solving social problems, and resolving conflicts.12 Examples include the Promoting Alternative Thinking Strategies (PATHS) programme13 and the Second Steps programme14, which promote emotional development, self- regulation, and social problem-solving skills.* Targeted social skills training (such as Participate and Learn Skills) involves helping children to use their time constructively, increasing self-esteem and providing positive role models.15* Other examples of social skills programmes with evidence of effectiveness include the ‘Good Behaviour Game’,16 the ‘Anne Frank’ programme,17 ‘It’s not OK!’18 and the SEAL curriculum materials.19
Involving parentsProgrammes that work with both parents and young people have been shown to be successful in reducing behavioural problems and preventing violenceExamples include:* Home–school partnership programmes that promote parental involvement in their children’s education;* Multi-systemic therapy, an intensive therapy- based programme provided in the home that works with children and parents to increase young people’s engagement in educationor training;20* Parenting programmes that try to enable carers to fulfil their role effectively (effective for younger children, 3–12 years).21Cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT)Well-administered CBT (for example, anger- coping skills training, problem-solving skills training) has been shown to be effective in addressing aggression and conduct disorders in pre-adolescents* CBT aims to change the way that young people think and act around a particular issue, and typically involves a range of procedures and exercises in individual or group sessions. It sometimes also involves the family or school in therapy.* CBT programmes should be organised with the help of a trained professional.22
Approaches with more limited evidence of effectivenessKnife arches/ knife wands* The evidence is unclear on whether routinely searching students for weapons on their entry into school, for example, by installing knife arches or using knife wands, has an impact on levels of violence.23* However, making ‘safe spaces’ (that is building an educational environmentthat young people feel is well monitored/ controlled, with harassment and victimisation actively prevented) in general may be one way to address violence in educational establishments.* Safe school environments can improve academic achievement, reduce weapons- carrying and prevent violence in general.24 Knife arches may have a part to play in this.Education/ attitude change programmes* There are a number of school-based education programmes targeted at reducing youth violence and gang membership, or changing attitudes to gangs, guns and knife crime.However, few have been evaluated and it is uncertain whether they have a long-termimpact on behaviour. The ‘Realising Ambition’ project is currently evaluating a number of such crime prevention interventions, and they arein the process of obtaining more data on the outcomes of these programmes. The evidence will be published regularly until the end of the programme in 2017 (see Resource C).
Extra- curricular activities* There is some evidence to suggest that extra-curricular programmes that provide well structured, youth-led activities (for example, sports, art, music, drama) may have a small positive effect on self-esteem and risky behaviour.* However, it is not clear whether any particular activities are more or less effective than others.* Some studies suggest that loosely structured activities may actually make things worse (possibly because unstructured clubs mean that young people will be meeting peers who may frequently engage in crime).* Whatever the specific activities, the research suggests that programmes should be comprehensive (addressing a range of risk factors for violence, for example, social skills, behavioural control and peer networks), age/ development appropriate, long term, and that they should attract, retain and build good relationships with young people who are genuinely at risk of offending.25
Conflict resolution* Conflict resolution programmes typically include a series of steps to help individuals to develop non-violent responses to conflict:setting ground rules; listening; finding common interests; brainstorming solutions to the problem; and discussing solutions.26* A survey by Goldsmiths College for theAnti-Bullying Alliance, commissioned by the Department for Education in 2011 reported a high degree of teacher satisfaction in using restorative approaches to resolve conflict.27* Evidence about the effectiveness of conflict resolution is limited. The studies that have been done show mixed results, although some positive outcomes have been reported.28
Approaches with a lack of evidenceEx-gang member testimonialsThere are multiple examples of former gang members visiting schools to talk about their experiences in the gang and why they left. However, there is insufficient evidence to say whether this is an effective approach to tackling youth violence.Drama education programmesSuch programmes use plays or films to show the impact of violence in order to change the attitudes of the audience. There is insufficient evidence to say that this is an effective approach to tackling youth violence.Some other interventions can be ineffective or even have a negative impact, for example, ‘scared straight’ style programmes that look to deter young people from crime by taking them on visits to prisons. The World Health Organization report into violence and health contains moredetails of what programmes might have an adverse impact.30
DetailsTypes of programmeAccessQuality criteriaiiNumber of programmesiiiBlueprints for Healthy Youth Development(www.blueprint- sprograms.com)Multiple child outcomes – education, health, youth justice and social care activities.Open accessYes56 to date (March 2015). All are underpinnedby the highest standards of evidence.The Social Research Unit at Dartington iscollaborating with Blueprints for Success to bring this databaseto the UK and Europe.http://dartington. org.uk/projects/ blueprints-for- success/ii Some of the repositories have quality criteria that help to give confidence that any claimed benefits for programmes are robust.iii At time of writing (May 2013).i 
DetailsTypes of programmeAccessQuality criteriaiiNumber of programmesiiiEarly InterventionEarlyOpenYes50 at date ofFoundationinterventionsaccesspublicationGuidebook: http://for children(March 2015),guidebook.eif.org.and youngbut this numberuk/peoplewill increasebetweenduring 2015-160 and 19as reviews intoin nine keya) what works todomains,prevent gang andincludingyouth violencepreventingand b) whatcrime,works to helpviolence andchildren developASB.social andemotional skillsconclude.Centre of Analysis‘YouthOpenYes13 (4 related tofor Youth Transitionsinterventions’accessviolence).(CAYT) repositoryrelating toof impact studiesbehaviour(www.ifs.org.uk/programmes,centres/caytRep-schoolPublications)attendance,educationalattainment,andemployment.Project OracleInterventionsMember-Yes(www.project-ora-broadlyshipcle.com)related torequiredimproving(Free)outcomesfor youngpeople,specifically inLondon.
DetailsTypes of programmeAccessQuality criteriaiiNumber of programmesiiiSafer CollegesProvidesOpenNo9 case studies,(www.safecolleges.case studies,access2 good practiceorg.uk/guns-gangs-guidancereports.knives/introduction)and tools tohelp furthereducationcollegesaddressviolence.Arts AllianceProvides aOpenNoOver 70. TheseEvidence Librarycatalogueaccesscover 11 different(www.artsevidence.of researchparticipant types:org.uk)evidencerelated to* offenders (48);effective arts* detainees (1);programmes* Not inthat are usedEducation,in the criminalEmploymentjustice sector.or Training(NEET) (2);* families ofoffenders (4);* ex-offenders(1);* prison staff (3);* publicaudience (1);* young peopleat risk (1);* school pupils(7);* staff (3);* non-offenders(1).
DetailsTypes of programmeAccessQuality criteriaiiNumber of programmesiiiLocal GovernmentOnline forumMember-No100 in total,Authority (LGA)throughshipwith 40 goodKnowledge Hub –whichrequiredand promisingGang and Youthpractitioners(Free)practice caseViolence Specialinvolved instudies.Interest Grouptackling gangand youthviolencecan shareand discussgood andpromisingpractice.
Other sources of what worksAllen G, (2011) Early Intervention: The Next Steps – An Independent Report to Her Majesty’s Government. London: Department for Work and Pensions. Available at: www.dwp.gov. uk/docs/early-intervention-next-steps.pdf. Review of existing early-intervention projects rather than a repository of violence prevention interventions. The report identifies the most effective early-intervention programmes according to three levels of evaluation quality.Realising Ambition: Information about 25 ‘proven’ and ‘promising’ interventions currently (May 2013) being replicated across the UK, as part of a £25 million Big Lottery Fund investment. All interventions are designed to target risk factors associated with subsequent involvement in the criminal justice system. Available at: www.catch-22.org.uk/Realising-Ambition.The education endowment foundation website:http://educationendowmentfoundation.org.uk/toolkitDepartment for Education (2011) The use and effectiveness of anti-bullying strategies in schools, a report by Goldsmiths, University of London, April 2011. Examines strategies that schools (in England) use to deal with episodes of bullying.London: Department for Education. Available at: https://www. gov.uk/government/publications/the-use-and-effectiveness-of- anti-bullying-strategies-in-schools.
Evaluation approachesMany of the websites in the table above have information on how to evaluate programmes. There is also a useful introduction to evaluation provided by the Web Centre for Social Research Methods: www.socialresearchmethods.net/kb/intreval.php.Goldacre, B. (2013) Building Evidence into Education. Sets out how teachers in England can build evidence-based practice in education. Available at: https://www.gov.uk/government/news/ building-evidence-into-education.Other resources for schools and collegesThe Safer Colleges website includes a range of self-assessment, guidance and case studies to help college leaders and their senior teams’to consider the issues of gangs, guns and knives within their college and community. Available at: www.safecolleges.org. uk/guns-gangs-knives/introduction.Teachers TV is now closed, but there is a range of non-exclusive distribution agreements that will ensure that the 3,500, 15-minute programmes in the archive are still available to watch online. See: www.education.gov.uk/schools/toolsandinitiatives/teacherstv.BBC Three’s schools series My Murder. Available at:www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b01f6qz1.Joint Enterprise training pack and DVD. A Home Office education training pack and DVD to increase young people’s awareness of the law on joint enterprise, which allows for group members involved in an offence to be liable for the main offence. Overall aims are to illustrate the further risks of gang involvement through highlighting the fact that it is possible to be convictedof a serious offence, such as murder or another violent offence, without striking the fatal blow or, in some cases, even physically
taking part. The training packs will be available shortly to order, free of charge, from the Home Office storage and distribution centre. To order: email homeoffice@prolog.co.ukBrook Traffic Light Tool (www.brook.org.uk/traffic-lights) is a Department for Education funded online resource to help professionals who work with children and young people toidentify, assess and respond appropriately to sexual behaviours. The tool enables professionals across different agencies to work to the same criteria when making decisions, to protect children and young people with a unified approach.This is Abuse (http://thisisabuse.direct.gov.uk) is a Home Office campaign that challenges young people’s acceptance of sexual and relationship abuse, encouraging victims to seek help and perpetrators to change their behaviour. The campaign includes a number of powerful videos aimed at young people. Materials are available for teachers from: www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_ data/file/97773/teen-abuse-toolkit.pdf or by emailing VAWGCampaign@homeofice.gsi.gov.uk.‘Sexting’ in schools: advice and support around self- generated images provides practical advice about how schools should respond to a ‘sexting’ incident, including how to support a child whose image has been shared and whether or not devices can be searched. Available at: www.securus-software.com/ Downloadable Content/sexting.zip.
Child Exploitation and Online Protection Centre (CEOP) Think You Know. Available at: www.thinkuknow.co.uk/Teachers and www.thinkuknow.co.uk/backtoschool CEOP provides training and education resources to use with children and young people to increase their (and their parent’s) understanding of online safety, including sexting and cyber-bullying.Ending Violence Against Women Coalition Resources for preventing violence against women and girls in schools. Available at: www.endviolenceagainstwomen.org.uk/resources-for- preventing-vawg-in-schools. A list of resources and examples of work in schools to tackle domestic abuse, sexual abuse and honour-based violence.NSPCCAvailable at www.nspcc.org.uk. The NSPCC has expanded their helpline to provide advice to parents or other adults worried about a young person at risk of gang involvement. www.nspcc.org.uk/ fighting-for-childhood/news-opinion/gangs-helpline-service- launches/FearlessAvailable at www.fearless.org. A website where young people can access non-judgemental information and advice about crime and criminality. The site also provides a safe place to give information anonymously about crime.
Key questions to askBe confident if...Be wary if...1) What is theThere is a clear linkThe way that benefitsprogramme specificallybetween what iswill be achieved istrying to achieve?being done and whatunclear, or seems far-outcomes are expected/fetched.claimed.2) How is ‘success’Objective outcomeImprovements aremeasured?measures are used,presented ‘as fact’looking specificallywith no supportingat the targeted groupevidence, or do notor characteristicsseem relevant to the(for example, age,group or characteristicsgender, specificof interest. Outcomebehavioural issues).measures areperception-based, andmay not reflect the realsituation.3) Who has theThe sample ofThe report seems toprogramme helped?individuals who feature’cherry-pick’ people toin the report seemlook at, or there is arepresentative of thegood reason to believetotal group of interest.that the people in thereport may show morebenefit than others.4) Is any changeA comparison groupAnalysis only looksseen really due to thehas been identified,at before-programmeprogramme?so an analysis can beversus after-programmedone of what would– something else couldhave happened hadbe responsible for anythe programme notchanges.been in place.
Key questions to askBe confident if...Be wary if...5) Are any claimedBenefits have beenThe time period whenbenefits sustained?noted over a reasonablebenefits have beentime period, not justclaimed seems short,immediately after theor is unclear.programme.6) Would this work inThere is enoughThe problem beingmy school or college?information for youtackled is very differentto say that you couldfrom the one youreplicate success inare facing, or theyour specific context,programme was putor the programme wasin place in a veryimplemented in andifferent context.environment similarto yours.
Try to...Because...1) Identify and then address a specific issueSuccessful approaches tend to address particular issues, are shaped to fit particular contexts,and are based on a thorough understanding of the problem. For example, research in schools suggests that violence programmes with an anti-gangs focus that followed a formal needs assessment (based on data to identify areas for improvement) were associated with bettermethods, involved more students, and achieved a higher level of use.312) Target the right age groupWhile you may need to address a specific problem immediately with an older age group (for example, knife carrying), generally there is better evidenceof improvements across a range of outcomes for early-stage interventions. Early-stage interventions may prevent problems that lead to an individual becoming involved in violence.3) Consider the causes of violenceResearch has identified factors that tend to be associated with violent victimisation or offending, although no single factor ‘causes’ violence.32In addition to contextual elements, key factors relate to the individuals themselves (for example, whether they have mental health or substance abuse difficulties), their relationships (poor parental support, problematic peer networks), and their community (high crime levels, local drug markets, difficulties in accessing victim care services). To prevent violence, you could look for evidence of problems across the risk factors above, and try to target them with a range of programmes.
Try to...Because...4) Work in partnershipWorking in partnership with other organisations can help you to understand and address contextual factors (for example, violent events, availability of weapons) that might be encouraging violence in your educational establishment.5) Evaluate what you have doneEvaluation promotes accountability, helps to establish what has been achieved, and can inform the development and improvement of the programme in the absence of initial evidence.A good evaluation plan will have a set of questions that need to be answered and a clear process identified for addressing them, including the kind of information that will be needed, where and how it will be obtained, and what‘success’ will look like. You may want to consider tracking your programme using records held by your establishment (for example, attendance, attainment, behaviour), attitude surveys (for example, learners, staff, parents, community), and information from local partners (for example, police data).
Endnotes1 See, for example: www.yjb.gov.uk/Publications/Resources/ Downloads/Risk%20Factors%20Summary%20fv.pdf2 See, for example: Walker, H. M. and Gresham, F. M. (1997) ‘Making schools safer and violence free’, Intervention in School and Clinic, vol. 32 (4), pp 199–204; Small, M. and Dressler Tetrick, K. (2001) School Violence: An overview. Washington DC: US Department of Justice; Justino, P., Leone, M. and Salardi, P. (2013) ‘Short- and Long-Term Impact of Violence on Education: The Case of Timor Leste’, World Bank Economic Review; Duttweiler, P. C. and Smink,J. (1997) ‘Critical strategies for effective dropout prevention’, School Safety Journal, pp 4–9; and Howell, J. C. (1998) Youth gangs: an overview. Washington DC: US Department of Justice.3 See, for example: www.gov.uk/government/news/ending- gang-and-youth-violence and www.gov.uk/government/ policies/reducing-knife-gun-and-gang-crime4 For more information see: www.gov.uk/government/ publications/ending-gang-and-youth-violence-provisional- funding-allocations.5 Available at: www.education.gov.uk/a00199342/getting-the- simple-things-right-charlie-taylors-behaviour-checklists.6 See: www.education.gov.uk/schools/pupilsupport/ behaviour/bullying/f0076899/preventing-and-tackling- bullying.7 Department for Education (2008) Information Sharing: Guidance for practitioners and managers. London: Department for Education. This guidance supports frontline practitioners working in child or adult services who haveto make decisions about sharing personal information on a case-by-case basis. The guidance can be used to
supplement local guidance and encourage good practice in information sharing and is available at: www.education.gov. uk/childrenandyoungpeople/strategy/integratedworking/ a0072915/information-sharing. Also Department for Education (2013) Working Together to Safeguard Children: A guide to inter-agency working to safeguard and promote the welfare of children. London: Department for Education. Available at: https://www.education.gov.uk/publications/ standard/publicationDetail/Page1/DFE-00030-2013.8 The evidence presented here is an indication of the research, rather than an exhaustive list, and many of the approaches have other benefits across a range of risky behaviours. It should be noted generally that the strongest evidence of effectiveness is for early-stage interventions. A useful source of further information is Gottfredson, D. C., Cook, P. J.and Na, C. (2011) ‘School-Based Crime Prevention’. In The Oxford Handbook of Crime Prevention, Welsh, B. C. and Farrington, D. P. (eds). Oxford: Oxford University Press.9 Jolliffe, D. and Farrington, D. P. (2008) The Influence of Mentoring on Reoffending. Stockholm: National Council for Crime Prevention; DuBois, D. L., Holloway, B. E., Valentine,J. C. and Cooper, H. (2002) ‘Effectiveness of Mentoring Programs for Youth: a meta-analytical review’, American Journal of Community Psychology, vol. 30 (2), pp 157–197; Jekielek, S. M., Moore, K. A., Hair, E. C. and Scarupa,H. J. (2002) Mentoring: A promising strategy for youthdevelopment. Washington DC: Child Trends.10 The Olweus Bullying Prevention Programme was developed in Norway and involves activities at the school, classroom and individual levels. These activities include assessment of the nature and prevalence of bullying in a school, defining school rules against bullying and interventions with students with a history of bullying and/or victimisation. KiVa is a bullying prevention programme developed in Finland. KiVa involves a universal, school-wide component that aims to1 
change norms about the acceptability of bullying amongst pupils and to support students and intervene when bullying occurs. KiVa also involves a targeted component where dedicated KiVa teams work with identified bullies, see, for example, Salmivalli, C., Kärnä, A. and Poskiparta, E. (2009) ‘Development, evaluation, and diffusion of a national anti- bullying program (KiVa)’. In Handbook of youth prevention science, Doll, B. Pfohl, W. and Yoon, J. (eds). New York: Routledge.11 Farrington, D. P. and Ttofi, M. M. (2009) ‘School-based programs to reduce bullying and victimization’, Campbell Systematic Reviews; Ttofi, M. M., Farrington, D. P. and Baldry, A. C. (2008) Effectiveness of Programmes to Reduce School Bullying: A Systematic Review. Stockholm: Swedish National Council for Crime Prevention. Ttofi et al. identified the most effective elements of anti-bullying programmesas parent training, improved playground supervision, disciplinary methods, school conferences, information for parents, classroom rules, classroom management, and videos; Thompson, F. and Smith, P. K. (2011) The Use and Effectiveness of Anti-Bullying Strategies in Schools, DfE Research Brief DFE-RB098. London: Department for Education. Available at: https://www.education.gov.uk/publications/eOrderingDownload/DFE-RB098.pdf – a survey of schools and local authorities in England. Practitioners rated proactive peer support and reactive anti-bullying school- based strategies as moderately effective.12 World Health Organization (2010). World report on violenceand health. WHO.13 See, for example, www.promoteprevent.org/publications/ ebi-factsheets/promoting-alternative-thinking-strategies- paths1 
14 See, for example, www.promoteprevent.org/publications/ ebi-factsheets/second-step-violence-prevention-curriculum15 Beelmann, A. and Lösel, F. (2006) ‘The effectiveness of programmes for the prevention of aggression, violence, delinquency and crime in childhood and adolescence: A critical overview’, Zeitschrift für Politische Psychologie, vol. 14, pp 313–330. Cited in World Health Organization (2009) Violence prevention: the evidence, WHO. Note that social skills training may be considered a type of cognitive behavioural therapy.16 A classroom-based management strategy used by teachers to socialise young school-age children and reduce aggressive and disruptive behaviours. This has been extensively studied (for example, Barrish, H. H., Saunders, M. and Wolf,M. M. (1969) ‘Good behaviour game: effects of individual contingencies for group consequences on disruptive behaviour in a classroom’, Journal of Applied Behavioural Analysis, vol. 2 (2), pp 119–24.17 This draws on the life story of Anne Frank and her diary to: challenge prejudice; reduce racial and ethnic hatred; encourage individuals to embrace democracy, positiveattitudes and citizenship; and encourage respect for others, thus preventing a move towards hate-related offending. Other issues covered include identity, stereotyping and diversity. It has been assessed in an unpublished thesis Fraser, P. (2011) Does Holocaust Education Impact upon Children’s Attitudes Toward Others? A study examining the impact of learning about Anne Frank’s life on eleven and twelve year olds, implicit and explicit attitudes toward out-groups, Thesis Part2. Also see: www.ifs.org.uk/caytpubs/CAYT_Rep13.pdf.18 A group of violence-prevention interventions that aim to change young people’s attitudes towards key issues, such as alcohol use, racism, homophobic violence, arson and other anti-social behaviour, abusive relationships and guns and1 
gangs. The programme has a dual aim of changing young people’s attitudes towards problematic issues as well as increasing attainment by supporting the national curriculum so that students become more engaged. See: www.arieltrust. com/detail/Its_Not_OK/186/82/staff.aspx (there is also a link on the page to a review of evaluations of the programme).19 Available at: www.teachfind.com/national-strategies/seal-curriculum-materials-year-year.20 Ross, A., Duckworth, K., Smith, D. J., Wyness, G. and Schoon, I. (2011) Prevention and Reduction: A review of strategies for intervening early to prevent or reduce youth crime and anti-social behaviour. London: Department for Education; Greene, J. and Pranis, K. (2007) Gang Wars: The failure of enforcement tactics and the need for effective public safety strategies. Washington DC: Justice Policy Institute.21 See, for example, www.whatworksforchildren.org.uk/docs/ Nuggets/pdfs/parenting%20nugget.pdf.22 For further details, including the contact details of organisations that may be able to help with setting up such a programme, see, for example: www.barnardos.org.uk/ cognitive_behaviour_therapy_for_behavioural_problems_ and_conduct_disorder_in_pre-adolescence-2.pdf.23 Sethi, D., Hughes, K., Bellis, M., Mitis, F. and Racioppi,F. (2010) European Report on Preventing Violence and KnifeCrime among Young People. World Health Organization.24 World Health Organization (2010) op. cit., endnote 12.25 World Health Organization (2010) op. cit., endnote 12; Durlak, J. A., Weissberg, R. P. and Pachan, M. (2010) ‘A meta-analysis of after-school programs that seek to promote personal and social skills in children and adolescents’ American Journal of Community Psychology, vol. 45, pp 294–309. Drama programmes have also been associated withanger reduction in adult offender populations, see Blacker,
J., Watson, A. and Beech, A. R. (2008) ‘A combined drama- based and CBT approach to working with self-reported anger aggression’, Criminal Behaviour and Mental Health, vol. 18, pp 129–137.26 Crawford, D. K. and Bodine, R. J. (1996) Conflict Resolution Education: A guide to implementing programs in schools, youth-serving organizations, and community and juvenile justice settings. Washington DC: US Department of Justice, Office of Justice Programs, Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention; and US Department of Education, Office of Elementary and Secondary Education, Safe and Drug-Free Schools Program.27 Department for Education (2011)The use and effectiveness of anti-bullying strategies in schools, a report by Goldsmiths, University of London, April 2011. Examines strategies that schools (in England) use to deal with episodes of bullying. London: Department for Education. Available at: https:// www.gov.uk/government/publications/the-use-and- effectiveness-of-anti-bullying-strategies-in-schools.28 For example, Shuval, K., Pillsbury, C. A., Cavanaugh, B., McGruder, L., McKinney, C.M., Massey, Z. and Groce,N.E (2010) ‘Evaluating the impact of conflict resolution on urban children’s violence-related attitudes and behaviors in New Haven, Connecticut, through a community–academic partnership’, Health Education Research, vol. 25 (5), pp 757–768.29 The Gang Resistance Education and Training (GREAT) programme in the US has been evaluated and showed some short-term improvements in attitudes and behaviours, see Esbensen, F.-A., Osgood, D. W., Taylor, T. J., Peterson, D. and Freng, A. (2001) ‘How great is G.R.E.A.T.?: Results from a quasi-experimental design’, Criminology and Public Policy, vol. 1, pp 87–118; Esbensen, F.-A., Peterson, D., Taylor, T. J., Freng, A., Osgood, D. W., Carson, D. C. and Matsuda,1 
K. N. (2011) ‘Evaluation and evolution of the Gang Resistance Education and Training (GREAT) Program’, Journal of School Violence, vol. 10, pp 53–70.30 World Health Organization (2010) op. cit., endnote 12.31 Goldstein, A. P. and Kodluboy, D. W. (1998) Gangs in Schools: Signs, Symbols, and Solutions. Champaign, Illinois, US: Research Press.32 Sethi et al. (2010) op. cit., endnote 24; Bellis, M., Hughes, K., Perkins, C. and Bennett, A. (2013) Protecting People, Promoting Health: A public health approach to violence prevention for England. North-West Public Health Observatory/Department of Health.1 
ISBN: 978-1-78246-125-8Home Office
Problem-solving policing is also known as problem-oriented policing. It's an approach to tackling crime and disorder that involves:identification of a specific problemthorough analysis to understand the problemdevelopment of a tailored responseassessment of the e?ects of the responseThe approach assumes that identifying and understanding the root causes of a problem – or conditions that allow it to continue – leads to an effective solution.SARA modelProblem-solving policing uses the SARA (scanning, analysis, response, assessment) model of problem solving.Video TranscriptWhat is the SARA model?The SARA model helps to apply problem-solving ideas to police practice.It's part of an approach to policing that encourages working creatively and collaboratively with partners and communities experiencing problems.Problem solving provides a process – a tried and tested series of steps to guide and structure efforts to reduce crime and disorder.Scanning involves identifying persistent problems that cause harm and call for police attention.Analysis involves systematic study into the causes or conditions that lead to a problem or enable it to persist. Response is the development or implementation of measures to try to reduce or eliminate the problem.Assessment is evaluation to determine whether the response has worked out as intended and whether the problem has been removed, reduced or unintentionally aggravated.The SARA model has four stages.1. Scanning – identifying and prioritising potential crime and disorder problems.2. Analysis – analysis of potential problems by gathering information and intelligence to identify underlying causes.3. Response – development and implementation of tailored activities to address the causes of the problem identified in the analysis phase.4. Assessment – measurement of the impact of the response, to test if it had the desired e?ect and to make changes to the response if required.There is a logical sequence to the SARA process. But in practice, good problem solving is often not linear. Analysis may lead to redefinitions of the problem and a return to scanning. Responses may need changes that call for further analysis. Assessments may indicate that a problem remains, suggesting that the process needs to start again.So when working through the SARA model, treat the different elements as fluid. Be willing to revisit earlier stages as new information emerges and modifications are required. That said, there are general requirements that should be met before moving through the different stages of SARA. These can be seen in our checklists.AnalysisAt this stage, you have drawn on a wide range of data and intelligence sources and decided on a specific type of crime on which to focus your problem-solving efforts. You understand:how the problem is trendingwhere and when it is most concentratedthe harms it generatesThe next step is to explore further to identify the causes and conditions that enable your problem to persist. This step is analysis.? Video TranscriptAt this stage of the SARA process, it is important to keep in mind that problem solving does not require you to identify and address all of the causes that give rise to your selected problem. That would be unrealistic. Some immediate situational factors are beyond the reach of practical local problem solving. Instead, effective problem analysis is about analysing a problem to identify so-called pinch points.Pinch pointsPinch points are those causes and conditions that:contribute to a problemare open to preventive intervention by the police and partnersThe goal of problem analysis is therefore to help you identify an appropriate and effective response that is based on those pinch points and can be delivered within the resources of your organisation.Effective problem solving is finding pinch points that can be changed by responses that can be implemented in a reasonable time frame, but that also have a sustained impact.Analysis toolsTwo tools can help to break down your problem and structure your analysis. These are:the problem analysis trianglecrime scriptsProblem analysis triangleProblem analysis triangles can help to structure the analysis of your local problem.? Video TranscriptThe inner triangle refers to three conditions that must occur for a crime to take place. These are:the presence of an equipped o?enderthe equipped o?ender being in contact with an accessible victim at the same timethe equipped o?ender and accessible victim being in a location where there is no adequate guardianshipThe middle triangle refers to those in a position to prevent crime by:guarding those who are potential victimsinhibiting (handling) the person(s) engaging in crimeoverseeing (managing) locations in ways that reduce the opportunities for crimes to occurThe outermost triangle relates to so-called super controllers. Super controllers are those able to apply levers to relevant handlers, guardians or place managers, to persuade them to act in ways that will lessen or eliminate a particular problem.Crime scriptsA crime script refers to the stages needed for an offence to be committed.? Video TranscriptAll crimes have a beginning, middle and end, with offenders making separate decisions at different stages in the crime commission process.Scripts can be useful when problem solving. They can help to:break down problems into the sequence of actions adopted before, during and after an o?enceidentify a fuller range of preventive pinch points where you might direct your problem-solving responsesThere is no set method for devising a crime script. Police data, investigation files, and interviews with offenders and victims can all help to create a script that reflects your local circumstances.Other data sources might also help you to analyse the crime commission process.
AssessmentAssessment forms the final stage of the SARA problem-solving process. It's evaluation to determine whether the:response has worked out as intendedproblem has been removed, reduced or unintentionally aggravated? Video TranscriptThere are two main purposes of assessment in problem solving. Assessment helps:to determine whether a problem persists following the implementation of responses – knowing this can help you decide whether further problem-solving e?orts to address the selected problem are neededwith learning lessons for the future – understanding your problem-solving e?orts can inform your future work and contribute to the wider evidence base about what is and is not e?ective in your problem? Video TranscriptFor the first purpose of assessment, it may be enough to know whether your local crime problem is persisting, regardless of whether your problem-solving work was responsible for any observed reductions.For the second purpose of assessment, we need to know much more, including whether it was what you did that led to a decrease in crime and whether there were any side effects because of your activities.This approach will help you and others know whether your responses are worth trying when tackling new crime problems. Meeting the second purpose of assessment is challenging and will vary in its level of complexity depending on the:scale of your local crime problemnature of the responses implementedskills and resources availableIt is important to decide early in the problem-solving process what the purpose of the assessment is. Deciding this has implications for what you do in other parts of the SARA process.For example, if you are aiming to learn lessons for the future, you will need to start planning your measurements before any responses are put in place.If you find that numbers of knife-enabled robberies have declined and then look for the evidence that what you did was responsible for those falls, it risks producing biased findings.
Home  Housing , local and community  Housing and communities  Owning and renting a property	Protect your land and property from fraud
You can take steps to protect your property from being fraudulently sold ormortgaged.This guide is also available in Welsh (Cymraeg).You’re more at risk if: your identity’s been stolen  you rent out your property  you live overseas the property’s empty the property is not mortgaged the property is not registered with HM Land RegistryYour property will be registered if you bought it or mortgaged it since 1998 - check the register if you’re unsure.You must tell HM Land Registry if information in the register is incorrect, for example if you change your contact address.You can track changes to the register or put a restriction on your title if you think you’re at risk.Track changes to the registerYou can sign up to get property alerts if someone applies to change the register of your property, for example if someone tries to use your property for a mortgage.This will not automatically block any changes to the register but will alert you when something changes so that you can take action.You can get alerts for up to 10 properties - there’s no fee.Put a restriction on your titleYou can stop HM Land Registry registering a sale or mortgage on your property unless a conveyancer or solicitor certifies the application was made by you.Your conveyancer or solicitor may charge you for providing a certificate if one is required by a restriction on your property.Business ownersFill in a request for a restriction if you’re a company owning property. Send your application to the address on the form - there’s no fee.If you do not live at the propertyFill in a request for a restriction for owners not living at the property if you own the property privately - there’s no fee.If you live at the propertyFill in an application for a restriction. It costs £40.Send completed forms to the HM Land Registry Citizen Centre. HM Land RegistryCitizen Centre PO Box 7806Bilston WV1 9QRHM Land Registry will tell you when they add the restriction.If you’re a victim of property fraudContact the HM Land Registry property fraud team if you think you’re the victim of property fraud.HM Land Registry property fraud team reportafraud@landregistry.gov.uk Telephone: 0300 006 7030Monday to Friday, 8am to 5pm Find out about call charges
Related contentRegistering land or property with HM Land RegistryProperty Alert
You can also: get advice from Citizens Advice Bureau or an independent legal adviser  report it to Action FraudExplore the topicBuying and owning a propertyServices and informationGovernment activityBenefitsEducation and learningDepartmentsBirths, death, marriages and careEmploying peopleNewsBusiness and self-employedEnvironment and countrysideGuidance and regulationChildcare and parentingHousing and local servicesResearch and statisticsCitizenship and living in the UKMoney and taxPolicy papers and consultationsCrime, justice and the lawPassports, travel and living abroadTransparencyDisabled peopleVisas and immigrationHow government worksDriving and transportWorking , jobs and pensionsGet involved
Home  Working , jobs and pensions  Redundancies, dismissals and disciplinariesRaise a grievance at work
OverviewIf you’re a worker and you’ve tried solving a problem or concern informally by talking to your manager but you’re not satisfied, you can make a formal grievance complaint in writing.Your employer should have a written g rievance procedure that tells you what to do and what happens at each stage of the process. After raising the grievance you’ll have a meeting to discuss the issue.You can appeal if you do not agree with your employer’s decision.You can also use mediation to resolve a problem. This can take place at any time during the dispute.For more information, see Acas’s step-by-step guide to formal grievance procedures.Following the Acas code of practiceYou and your employer should follow the Acas code of practice on disciplinary and grievance procedures.Otherwise, if you take your claim to an employment tribunal, any compensation you might get could be adjusted by up to 25%.
Related contentHandling an employee's grievance Make a claim to an employment tribunal
 NextGrievance procedureView a printable version of the whole guideExplore the topicYour rights and legal support Redundancies, dismissals and disciplinariesServices and informationGovernment activityBenefitsEducation and learningDepartmentsBirths, death, marriages and careEmploying peopleNewsBusiness and self-employedEnvironment and countrysideGuidance and regulationChildcare and parentingHousing and local servicesResearch and statisticsCitizenship and living in the UKMoney and taxPolicy papers and consultationsCrime, justice and the lawPassports, travel and living abroadTransparencyDisabled peopleVisas and immigrationHow government worksDriving and transportWorking, jobs and pensionsGet involved
Home  Disabled people  Work and disabled peopleReasonable adjustments for workers with disabilities or health conditions
Employers must make reasonable adjustments to make sure workers withdisabilities, or physical or mental health conditions, are not substantially disadvantaged when doing their jobs.This applies to all workers, including trainees, apprentices, contract workers and business partners.This guide is also available in Welsh (Cymraeg).Reasonable adjustments include: chang ing the recruitment process so a candidate can be considered for a job doing things another way, such as allowing someone with social anxiety disorder to have their own desk instead of hot-desking making physical changes to the workplace, like installing a ramp for a wheelchair user or an audio-visual fire alarm for a deaf person letting a disabled person work somewhere else, such as on the ground floor for a wheelchair user changing their equipment, for instance providing a special keyboard if they have arthritis allowing employees who become disabled to make a phased return to work, including flexible hours or part-time working o?ering employees training opportunities, recreation and refreshment facilitiesGet help and adviceYou can get advice on reasonable adjustments from the Disability Employment Adviser (DEA) at y our local Jobcentre Plus o?ce.You can apply for Access to Work if you need extra help.If you’re in Northern Ireland, find out about employment for people with disabilities or contact Access to Work (NI).There’s more detail about employers’ obligations and how to meet them on the Equality and Human Rights Commission website.
Part ofEmploy someone: step by stepGet your business ready to employ sta?: step by stepRelated contentAccess to Work: get support if you have a disability or health conditionDefinition of disability under the Equality Act 2010Employers: preventing discrimination
Explore the topic Work and disabled people Recruiting and hiringTrade unions and workers rights Your rights at work and trade unionsServices and informationGovernment activityBenefitsEducation and learningDepartmentsBirths, death, marriages and careEmploying peopleNewsBusiness and self-employedEnvironment and countrysideGuidance and regulationChildcare and parentingHousing and local servicesResearch and statisticsCitizenship and living in the UKMoney and taxPolicy papers and consultationsCrime, justice and the lawPassports, travel and living abroadTransparencyDisabled peopleVisas and immigrationHow government worksDriving and transportWorking , jobs and pensionsGet involved
24/03/2025  Recovering and identifying the deceased and human remainshttps://www.college.police.uk/app/civil-emergencies/disaster-victim-identification/recovering-and- identifying-deceased-and-human-remains
Page
Recovering and identifying the deceased and human remainsThis page is from APP, the official source of professional practice for policing. First published23 October 2013 Updated7 February 2025Written by College of Policing Disaster victim identification 38 mins readVictim holding audit areaThe victim holding audit area (VHAA) is often a temporary structure where deceased persons and human remains retrieved from the scene of a major incident can be initially taken. They can then be transferred to a designated mortuary.A VHAA is usually established and located just outside the inner cordon. Where there are multiple scenes, or the scene covers an extensive area, more than one VHAA may be established. In maritime incidents, a VHAA could be established at each of the seaports or airports where deceased people and human remains will be taken following retrieval from the scene.A location may need to be identified and established before a formal VHAA is established in order to receive and store bodies moved by other emergency responders. In these circumstances, the police tactical commander takes responsibility for establishing an area which should be secure and shielded from view. The VHAA will be formally established under the direction of the scene evidence recovery manager (SERM) and consideration should be given to the deployment of police disaster victim identification (DVI) teams to both the VHAA and casualty clearing station where required.Responders should be advised of the establishment of the VHAA and the circumstances under which deceased persons or human remains should be taken there.Restricting access
Restrict access to the VHAA. Keep a log of the name and role of every individual who enters and leaves, along with the reasons for access and the time. The number of personnel deployed to a VHAA is determined by the number of fatalities. Disaster victim identification (DVI) trained officer(s) are responsible for the accurate recording and storage of the deceased and exhibits.DocumentationIt is essential for the professionalism and integrity of the investigation that the correct documentation is completed carefully and accurately. This is also essential for identifying deceased persons and any human remains. Use the INTERPOL disaster victim recovery form to document the recovery of deceased persons and human remains. Use the online INTERPOL disaster victim recovery form if hard copy disaster victim recovery booklets are unavailable.Contents of a disaster victim recovery formThe disaster victim recovery form contains a unique reference number and a bar code and scene notes. The booklet also contains labels with the same bar code on them to ensure continuity. Labels comprise: audit labels bag labels for deceased persons or human remains  scene labels item labels for deceased person or human remainsDVI teams will be trained to use forms prior to deployment. One form must be used for each deceased person or human remain.Recovery teams may also use several other templates and forms at the scene in relation to:  early intervention checks VHAA continuityTermination of life and verification of deathThe aim of the emergency services is to save lives. The injured are put into triage categories according to various parameters, with P1 patients being the most serious. Ten-second triage (TST) is now available to all responders, not just ambulance services. One possible outcome is that the injured are put into a ‘not breathing’ category, indicated by a silver-coloured checked band, in line with TST.TST is followed by reassessment by healthcare professionals when appropriate. Some of those with silver triage bands on may be considered amenable to resuscitation. They will be retagged as P1 and prioritised for treatment and evacuation.For others, where a full assessment shows that ongoing care will be futile, or where the resources required to allow any chance of successful resuscitation are unavailable, they will be recognised as dead at this point.There may be a lower threshold for resuscitation in children. Attempts should be made in ALL cases unless there is a condition unequivocally associated with death. But the process described below should be followed regardless of age if circumstances dictate.
An appropriately completed ‘dead’ tag must be applied and will contain the time, date and be signed. The tag must be applied to the casualty/body. For any DVI/body recovery to be authorised, the body must have been recognised as dead.This process will usually be carried out by the ambulance service but can also be completed by a pathologist or on direction of HM coroner or procurator fiscal.Deceased patients should only be moved if they are obstructing an evacuation route for other casualties, as the location is to be treated as a crime scene.In all incidents (including major incident fatalities or mass fatality), HM coroner or procurator fiscal assume the legal care and control of the body. They maintain responsibility for authorising the following: recovery examination  retentionSubsequent death of injured victimIf an injured victim subsequently dies of their injuries, HM coroner or procurator fiscal, in consultation with the SIO and SIM, should decide whether to transfer the body to the designated police mortuary for the incident. This allows for consistent management of the deceased and supports the process of identification and investigation. By channelling all fatalities through a single mortuary with dedicated facilities, the police and health services will be able to better support the bereaved.Where a casualty dies in hospital, the bereaved must be made aware of procedure and kept informed at each stage of the process, including: identification viewing the deceased  releasing the deceasedVictim recovery teamsPersonnel used to recover deceased persons from a scene of an emergency or major incident should have completed a College of Policing-approved DVI foundation course.Victim recovery teams work under the SERM and have a designated team leader. They may also work in conjunction with other search and rescue teams, such as urban search and rescue capability (USAR). They will require additional training to an approved standard to work: in confined spaces performing confined area searches  safely at height under chemical, biological, radiological or nuclear (CBRN) conditionsResponsibilitiesVictim recovery teams are responsible for:
 recovering all victims in accordance with the approved training standard working according to the recovery strategy set by the senior identification manager (SIM)  completing all necessary disaster victim recovery documentation completing the initial visual check on deceased persons and human remains and recording all identification details revealed ensuring that all necessary photographs are taken at the scene sealing of body bags – the default position will be to seal the victim bags unless the SIO/SIM indicate differently which must be recorded as a policy decision by the SIO/SIM complying with all health and safety requirementsSearchThe SERM establishes the number of victim recovery teams required to conduct recovery actions. This will be informed by the timescales and parameters set by the SIM and gold commander.The SERM may be advised by a: police search adviser on search matters or on recovery of deceased persons, human remains, property or evidence crime scene manager on forensic and evidential recovery procedures  bomb scene examinerThe victim recovery teams may be deployed as stand-alone teams. They may also operate in conjunction with police search-trained personnel or other search personnel.Open area searchesThe SERM can initially deploy search teams or victim recovery teams in a sweep-type search. This could be to cover larger areas with low numbers of deceased persons or human remains scattered across the area.The scene may be divided into sectors and zones. Each zone should consist of channels of a suitable length and width for a victim recovery team to operate along. The size of the zone should consider the terrain and the nature of the incident. Where the deceased persons or human remains are concentrated, the width of the search channel should be reduced. Each channel should have a start and stop position clearly identified. Both edges of the channel should be marked by orange tape.When deceased persons or human remains (including suspected human remains) are located, the team leader should consider asking a doctor or another expert to examine the person or remains. A member of the victim recovery team may then conduct an initial visual check of the deceased. The team’s documentation officer or team leader commences the audit trail on the disaster victim recovery form. They should use the approved label with the unique reference number and barcode. This is recorded alongside the deceased or human remains while they are still in situ.Any personal property on or near the deceased or human remains is also recorded in situ to provide context of the find. Where an incident is confined to a limited area, the victim recovery team may be deployed in two pairs or work as a team of four. When working in a pair, one member can undertake the search and recovery while the other acts as a monitor to ensure the health and safety of the officer conducting the retrieval. The team leader may rotate pairs or larger teams in difficult situations or deploy them together as appropriate to the
Maritime incidentsRetrieving the deceased from the sea can be a challenging and complicated process and will involve the Maritime and Coastguard Agency. Very careful consideration needs to be given before police DVI teams are deployed in any maritime recovery.In the event of a mass fatality incident occurring at sea, the police should send a liaison officer to the Maritime Rescue Coordination Centre, which is in command and control of the offshore element of the response to the incident. The liaison officer should identify locations where the deceased and human remains will be brought ashore. These may include ports, harbours, slipways and airports or helicopter landing sites. Wherever possible, the number of these landing locations should be kept to a minimum. Ideally, a single landing site should be used so that documentation can be completed in line with the DVI process. The documentation should be completed by the police victim recovery team at the designated VHAA. To ensure continuity, national documentation should be used to record details.Police victim recovery teams should be sent to the designated landing location(s) to establish a VHAA. The victim recovery team should assume responsibility for deceased persons and human remains. The VHAA should be located close to a landing site where possible.The vessels undertaking the recovery operations should be instructed to identify, wherever possible, the coordinates of where the deceased person or human remains were recovered. The vessel should land the deceased and human remains at the designated landing location(s).Road traffic collisionsRetrieving the deceased from the scene of a fatal road traffic collision can be a challenging and complicated process. Very careful consideration needs to be given to the deployment of police DVI teams at a fatal road traffic collision. See also APP on Roads policing.Recovery actionsThere are five aspects of recovery from a scene:  recovering deceased persons recovering human remains recovering personal property  recovering evidential property recovering technical property - items that may be required for any technical enquiry being conducted by:  the Health and Safety Executive (HSE) Air Accident Investigation Branch (AAIB) Rail Accident Investigation Branch (RAIB) Marine Accident Investigation Branch (MAIB)  any other organisationWhere more than one aspect applies to a recovered item, the SIM, SIO and lead investigator (or their representatives) must liaise with each other. They should agree how that item is to be treated, who will take
Recovering deceased persons or human remainsWhen deceased persons or human remains are located and the ROLE process has been completed, a member of the victim recovery team should conduct an initial visual check. This is to note any obvious evidence that may help to identify the deceased.The situation of the deceased is recorded in situ. The team’s documentation officer or team leader commences the audit trail on the disaster victim recovery form. They should use the approved label with the unique reference number and barcode. This information is recorded alongside the deceased or human remains while they are still in situ. Any personal property on or near the deceased or human remains is also recorded in situ to provide context about the find.Retrieving personal propertyThe SERM should agree a protocol with the SIM and SIO for roles and responsibilities of recovery teams.The SIM should develop a policy for retrieving personal property, including the documentation and audit trail required. This policy should include whether a separate property exhibits officer is appointed to assume responsibility for items retrieved from the scene of a mass fatality incident. Only items found on or attached to deceased persons should accompany them to the mortuary. Other property, including property found lying on top of a person, should be treated as a separate item and recorded as such.There may be personal property linked to deceased persons or human remains that offers evidence of potential identity. This could include identification documentation. These items should be photographed with the body, giving the position in which, they were seen on the body. The item may be removed for checking. A detailed record of the information given, as well as the location of the item, should be made in the disaster victim recovery form scene notes section. These items should be recovered with the deceased, placed in a clear property bag and physically attached to the deceased in the same body. A photographic record of the process should be made.This information will be used by the casualty bureau (CB) to apply the correct grading to a missing person record. Where possible identity is established, it is likely that a family liaison officer (FLO) will be allocated to the family of the deceased to begin antemortem procedures.Retrieving evidenceRetrieving evidence is usually the SIO’s responsibility. The SIO and SIM should agree on a protocol for retrieving evidence. The protocol should include when evidence recovery will be carried out in relation to retrieving deceased persons, human remains and recovering personal property.Separate documentation and audit trails are required for retrieving evidence, and the SIO or SIM should appoint dedicated exhibits officers.Technical property
agencies such as the HSE, AAIB, MAIB or Ministry of Defence.Antemortem proceduresIn the context of DVI, antemortem refers to the processes that relate to identifying the victim prior to death. This includes collecting and analysing material or property. Antemortem procedures also refer to processes associated with survivors and managing missing person reporting.Antemortem teamThis team will be appointed by the SIM and be constituted according to the scale and specific requirements of the incident. It will:input information from the yellow antemortem forms onto the chosen technological solution (the internationally recognised Plassdata if being used) after being quality assured by the family liaison coordinator (FLC) or antemortem coordinator (AMC)prepare a list of missing persons believed to have been involved in the disasterobtain evidence of the likelihood that the missing persons were involvedcreate a database of antemortem procedures evidence for comparison with that from the post-mortem procedures documentation (for assessment by the identification commission) provide a single point of contact for the FLC and FLO and provide appropriate assistance to them.Antemortem coordinatorThe antemortem coordinator (AMC) works with the appointed FLC. They manage tasking FLOs and crime scene investigators to collect suitable comparative samples. These samples are used for analysis and comparison during antemortem procedures.The AMC is responsible for compiling data in respect of each person reported missing and believed to have been involved in the incident. This includes people not yet accounted for or not yet identified as deceased. They are also responsible for the quality of the data. This data is compared with all available data collected from post- mortem procedures to provide identification during the reconciliation process.The AMC‘s responsibilities can be undertaken by the FLC or CB manager working directly to the SIM. In the event of a large-scale incident, consideration should be given to appointing a deputy SIM to oversee this area of work.Family liaison strategy
The key aims of a family liaison strategy are: providing an effective family liaison response to incidents of major/mass fatality incidents assisting in the investigation into the identification of those who have been graded as highly likely to have died by gathering information, evidence and antemortem data working with the family to comply with their right to receive all relevant information connected to the enquiry, subjected to the needs of the investigation, in a way that is proportional to their fundamental right to privacy and family life securing the confidence, cooperation and trust of the family, thereby enhancing their contribution to the investigation. This can have a positive effect on the wider issues of community trust and confidence, as well as bringing positive benefits to the investigation gathering material from the family in a manner which contributes to the investigation and preserves its integrity ensuring that the family are given information about support agencies and that referrals, as appropriate, are made to the Victim Support Homicide Service / National Road Victim Service (NRVS) / victim / witness support / NHS specialist services and other identified credible agencies in accordance with the family’s consent and wishesObjectivesThe objectives of family liaison are: assisting in the identification and repatriation process as directed by HM coroner or procurator fiscal and the SIM in the event of a foreign national being reported missing/deceased, provide effective communication with relevant embassies in compliance with the Vienna Convention gathering evidence and information from the family in a manner which contributes to the investigation and preserves its integrity working with the family to comply with their right to receive all relevant information connected with the enquiry (in compliance with the Code of Practice for Victims of Crime in England and Wales 2020), subject to the needs of the investigation and in a way that considers their human rights ensuring that the family are provided information about the support available and, where appropriate, that referrals are made to the relevant support services in accordance with the consent of the family and general data protection regulation explaining coronial and victim identification procedures and criminal justice processes to families explaining the police communication and media strategy and assisting the family in managing the potential impact the media may have on them and the investigation ensuring the health and wellbeing of the FLOs concluding or withdrawing family liaison deploymentsAntemortem sample collectionA thorough, comprehensive and exhaustive search for evidence should be conducted. The utmost care must be afforded when handling and storing the personal belongings of a missing person. These items can hold great sentimental value for the families.
Gathering this information for identification raises the expectation with the families that their loved one has died. This is hugely distressing for the families. Searching for the antemortem data can disturb the environment of their loved one.Relatives may want to preserve the integrity of the environment at all costs. It is essential to explain the need of the search and be sympathetic and empathetic with the family, acting with respect and dignity for both the families and the deceased.The FLO should supervise the collection of antemortem samples in conjunction with a crime scene investigator. The continuity of the sample from collection to laboratory examination needs to be carefully recorded and a method of sample labelling needs to be established by the SIM, FLC/FLA or AMC.Any personal effects of a missing person must have evidence of provenance in the form of documented witness accounts and an audit trail.Antemortem dental comparison and odontologyAntemortem dental comparison samples may be collected from dental practices and orthodontic practices. Samples can also be collected directly from the family or home of the missing person believed to be the deceased.Dental records do not follow the patient. The FLO should ask the family for the names of the missing person’s current and previous dentists. This will ensure that all relevant dental information is collected.Requesting samplesWhen requesting samples from professional medical and dental sources, it is important to ask for the original:  dental charts and all dental records X-rays models (casts) specialist records and relevant correspondence  medical and dental clinical photographsAntemortem evidenceAntemortem evidence that may be collected from the family or home may include:  recent photographs of the person smiling and showing their teeth recent photographs of the person from the side and the frontAntemortem DNA sample collectionDNA comparison is most efficient when a DNA profile from deceased persons or human remains can be matched against a comparative sample held on the national DNA database.Four types of DNA can be obtained as part of the antemortem data collection strategy.1. Reference DNA1. 
A profile that is stored on the national DNA database. A national DNA database record will only be available if the deceased had previously come to police attention.2. Surrogate DNAA profile obtained from objects and materials that are likely to yield the DNA profile of the deceased. These are usually personal objects used exclusively by the deceased. Examples include: blood  saliva  sweat seminal fluid  skin cellsConsider personal objects used exclusively by the missing person:  hairbrush/comb clothing toothbrush  razors headwear chewing gum  lipstick cigarettes mobile phones/tablets/laptops  jewellery glasses gum shields wind instruments (the reed)  footwear gloves medical inhalers3. Familial DNAA profile obtained from known, close blood relatives of the deceased. These are the deceased’s:  natural mother known natural father  confirmed children4. Elimination DNAA profile obtained to confirm or eliminate a surrogate or familial DNA profile. For example, a sample from a sibling of the same sex may be provided. The DNA profiles can then be compared to demonstrate that they are indeed siblings. For a UK-based incident, the national DNA database crime stain kits (eight-series barcodes) should be used. This ensures that each individual sample is labelled with a unique barcode. The reference sample kits should be submitted to the laboratory as soon as possible. If there is to be any delay in submission, the kits and DNA samples should be frozen.
Antemortem fingerprint sample collectionA crime scene investigator should collect latent fingerprint marks, which should be compared on an automated fingerprint identification system, such as IDENT1.There may be other means of obtaining a set of latent fingerprint marks which the FLO should explore, including:fingerprints taken by the police and held by the Criminal Records Officefingerprint records in biometric passports or on digital devices workplace biometric data, which may include fingerprint records held by the human resources or personnel departmentWhere possible, fingerprint experts should have relevant fingerprint data collected during post-mortem procedures when attending the antemortem data collection site. This may speed up and simplify the identification process and significantly reduce the stress of such procedures for the family.Support for familiesGetting help and further supportGrief can manifest itself in many ways. To what extent depends on many factors, including the relationship with the person who has died and the way they died. After a traumatic death, such as losing a loved one, those feelings of grief can be magnified.It is imperative that support is offered and the families are signposted to support to help them.Should the incident under investigation be declared a criminal investigation, it should be discussed with the Victim Support Homicide Service as soon as reasonably possible.The definition of a major criminal incident is where a crime:  causes multiple fatalities and/or serious injuries requires a response under one or more of the emergency services’ major incident plan is such that some degree of central government support or coordination may become necessary.Characteristics of a major criminal incident often include the following. A large number of victims and witnesses (often involving loss of life and serious injury, but also longer- term trauma and impact on victims’ and witnesses’ lives). Wide-ranging and complex needs for support (such as wider community, health, emotional and practical support). A coordinated government response to address immediate, short-term and longer-term needs of victims and witnesses and, where fatalities occur, bereaved families.
 Extensive media coverage of the incident.The national homicide serviceThe national homicide service should be activated if the incident is declared a major criminal investigation. The service provides a dedicated caseworker who conducts a needs assessment, which is used to develop and agree a support plan. The caseworker can help support a wide range of needs, including emotional and practical support.This will be tailored to individual needs and can include referral to therapy for trauma and bereavement; help with needs such as debt, welfare benefits or housing issues; advocacy through domestic homicide reviews; and support throughout an inquest.The homicide service also offers a peer support network where people can be matched with a peer supporter, attend group peer support sessions or access the online peer support platform.There is no time limit on support. People can enter, leave and re-join the homicide service at any point if their needs change.The homicide service supports families bereaved by, eyewitnesses to and children or young people affected by a homicide or major incident where a crime has caused fatalities.A bereaved family member means a person resident in England and Wales who is: the spouse, partner, civil partner, parent, child, sibling, stepparent, step-child, step-sibling or a dependant of the victim another family member where there are none of the above connected to the victim  a carer to the victim prior to their death; and/or    a carer (either before or as a result of the death) to one or more of the dependants of the victim where a: dependant is a child under 18, over 18 and in full-time education or an adult with additional vulnerabilities or needs, meaning they need someone to fulfil a caregiving role; and carer is someone who has or had a substantial role in looking after the deceased, a family member, partner or friend (this can include foster parents, but not carers provided by local authorities such as home help)An eyewitness means an individual who has directly witnessed a homicide or death due to a major criminal incident.In addition, children and young people (up to the age of 24) who fall outside the above criteria but are affected by a homicide or major criminal incident are eligible for outreach support. This is a short-term intervention providing up to three group and one-to-one emotional and practical support sessions in the community in the immediate aftermath of a homicide or major criminal incident.The FLO should inform families of the service and a notification form should be completed as soon as practicable. If they consent to share information, they should be referred into the service.In the event that the families do not wish to be referred onto the homicide service, they should be given information that they can self-refer by calling 0300 303 1984 or completing an online form at Victim Support.
If the homicide occurred abroad, bereaved families can call 020 7008 5000, selecting the option ‘Consular services for British nationals’ to seek support. The FCDO can submit a referral, as well as families self-referring to the homicide service directly.National emergencies trustThe national emergencies trust is an independent charity that collaborates with charities and other bodies to raise money for people affected by national emergencies in the UK. The trust initiates nationwide fundraising appeals to raise funds for survivors and their families. The funds raised are distributed as financial gifts to those impacted.A national emergency is defined as a major incident (such as a terror attack, major fire, pandemic or natural disaster) that is of national significance, even if the need is local. The national emergencies trust currently responds to disasters in England, Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland.Donations support survivors in four ways.1. Physical rehabilitation2. Mental health support3. Bereavement support4. Financial assistanceSee National Emergencies Trust for further information.Additional resourcesOther organisations that can assist are as follows. Assist Trauma Care   Good Grief Trust Support after Murder and Manslaughter (SAMM)  Disaster Action INTERPOL Embassy support HM coroner or procurator fiscal support services  Samaritans Cruse Bereavement Care Victim Support (in cases of criminal investigation) British Red Cross  Embrace Brake LBT GlobalPost-mortem proceduresIdentification criteria
The criteria used to identify the deceased are set by HM coroner or procurator fiscal or in consultation with the SIM. The lead pathologist is also consulted.The agreed criteria determine which primary identifiers should be used, which, in turn, define the antemortem data collection strategy. Secondary and supporting identifiers are usually used to support primary identifiers.Normally, one primary identifier is sufficient for identification. However, following the best evidence rule, this can be accompanied by secondary and supporting information to ensure accurate identification. Visual identification is not in itself a reliable, accurate form of identification.Primary identifiersThese include: odontology (forensic dental examination) ridgeology (includes fingerprints, palm prints and planter/foot print)  DNAFor further information, see identification evidence.Secondary identifiersThese include: unique medical identifier – serial number of an implant  marks scars tattoos medical records medical images, such as x-ray, CT scan  unique identifiable jewellery personal effects distinctive or unique clothing physical disease, amputations etcAssistance onlyThese include: jewellery  clothing  location description visual appearance of the deceasedMortuary management team
Local authorities are responsible for providing mortuary facilities and arranging a licence for emergency mortuaries with the Human Tissue Authority (HTA). The MFCG should also appoint a mortuary facilities manager, who sits on the mortuary management team and works alongside the police mortuary operations coordinator (PMOC).MembersMembers of the mortuary management team may include:  police mortuary operations coordinator (PMOC) mortuary facilities manager/emergency mortuary coordinator (normally local authorities or Health Service) lead pathologist designated individual under the Human Tissue Act 2004 HM coroner or procurator fiscal’s officer  mortuary exhibits officer antemortem coordinator (AMC) health, safety, welfare and wellbeing coordinator  resources manager senior radiographer or radiation protection supervisor  specialist advisers as requiredResponsibilitiesThe responsibilities of the mortuary management team include:  supervising mortuary procedures coordinating supplies, equipment, services and staff) liaising with the police media liaison officer at the gold tier of command, government departments and press officesThe mortuary management team must record all decisions made in preparation for a mass facility incident, during the response and during post-incident reviews.Mortuary facilities managerIf an existing public or NHS facility is used as an emergency mortuary, local authorities or an NHS trust should have appointed a manager to run the facility. This person usually undertakes the role of mortuary facilities manager, if that mortuary is used for DVI or for a mass fatality incident.ResponsibilitiesThe specific responsibilities of the mortuary facilities manager include: liaising with the HTA to arrange for any necessary licensing of the venue  arranging logistical support to all areas of the mortuary facility working with the police mortuary operations coordinator (PMOC) to oversee all relevant staffing requirements, including welfare issues
 arranging for a qualified first aider to be on site and available at all times of operation working with the supervising forensic pathologist to ensure there is appropriate consideration and enforcement of all relevant health and safety legislation and hygiene practices managing the provision, use and stockpiling of personal protective equipment, stationery, office supplies and mortuary staff refreshments (mortuary facilities) arranging for the proper handling, storage and disposal of clinical waste  supervising cleaning all parts of the mortuary facility organising and supervising commissioning and decommissioning the mortuary facility (including ensuring that all necessary cleansing and repairs are undertaken in advance)Mortuary documentation officerIn a large-scale incident, the PMOC may require additional assistance and may appoint a mortuary documentation officer. This post is held by a DVI-trained police officer who is responsible to the PMOC.ResponsibilitiesThe responsibilities of a mortuary documentation officer include: quality assuring the documentation in the mortuary in relation to the post-mortem examination of victims  collating post-mortem data documentation liaising with the pathologist, odontologist and other specialists to agree and establish the appropriate documentation, ensuring consistency within the submission process for reconciliation liaising with the major incident room regarding all evidential documentation and other disclosable data created within the mortuary liaising with the reconciliation team (if created) to provide post-mortem informationMortuary exhibits officerThis will be a trained police officer or police staff member who is responsible to the PMOC.ResponsibilitiesThe responsibility of a mortuary exhibits officer include: recording details of all property received from the post-mortem team listing the property against the relevant deceased person or human remains ensuring the correct packaging and labelling and continuity of all exhibits generated during the post- mortem process recording details of all movement and storage of exhibits providing secure storage of property taken from the deceased  liaising with the major incident room as necessary arranging all forensic submissions in line with the policy decisions of HM coroner or procurator fiscal the senior investigating officer (SIO) and senior identification manager (SIM) consulting with the family liaison coordinator (FLC) about which items of property the relatives wish to be returned in due course liaising with the FLC, the SIO and funeral directors about restoring property to family and friends
 disposal or release of property in accordance with instructions from HM coroner or procurator fiscal the SIO and/or SIMMortuary arrangementsLocal resilience forum (LRF) plans for mass fatalities should include details of mortuary arrangements. The requirement for mortuaries depends on the number of deceased, their condition and the required level of post- mortem investigation. There are three options for mortuary arrangements: existing mortuaries existing mortuaries with additional storage facilities arranged local emergency mortuary arrangements (including regional arrangements, where they exist)The deceased should be taken to a mortuary in line with the identification policy, and reception and documentation arrangements should be agreed between HM coroner or procurator fiscal and the SIM. The general principle is that one mortuary should be used. Decisions about mortuary arrangements are usually made by the MFCG.Local emergency mortuary arrangementsEach LRF and local authority should have a plan for activating an emergency mortuary. This shouldinclude locations identified as suitable (as agreed by HM coroner or procurator fiscal that comply with Home Office (2004) Guidance on dealing with fatalities in emergencies, Annex B Mortuary Requirements.Where an LRF has been unable to identify suitable existing local mortuary facilities, they may have a formalised arrangement with a private sector company to use emergency mortuary facilities.Reception arrangementsDeceased persons and human remains are transported from the scene (usually from the VHAA) under arrangements agreed by HM coroner or procurator fiscal the SIO and the SIM.Transportation is subject to local arrangements and may be undertaken by:  police funeral directors private ambulancesMortuaries usually have a designated reception area to which all arriving deceased people and human remains are taken. On arrival, police personnel should check that the correct documentation has accompanied the deceased or human remains. They should also check that the audit trail is intact and should record the details. The deceased or human remains are then accepted into the mortuary and conveyed to the relevant storage area.The personnel working in the reception area should be briefed on the nature of the scene. Appropriate personal protective equipment should be provided to enable them to undertake their work safely.Documentation in the mortuaryAll mortuary procedures including documentation will be in line with nationally agreed standards. .
The recovery of the deceased and human remains should have been documented on the INTERPOL disaster victim recovery booklet as previously outlined. The pink post-mortem forms should be used throughout the post- mortem procedures in conjunction with the forms below: mortuary process register  early information forms mortuary movement logs  exhibit booksInternationally agreed methods of identification evidenceForensic odontologyOdontology is a branch of forensic medicine involved with dentistry. The teeth are the hardest tissue in the human body and are the most resistant to trauma, decomposition, water immersion and fire. Odontology may be the primary method of identification in cases where there are more extreme levels of damage or decomposition of a deceased body.When loose or individual teeth are found at the scene of a major disaster, they should never be destroyed, as they are likely to still hold DNA and offer valuable clues to identity later on. If dental items such as false teeth, crowns, bridges, dentures and fillings are found, they should also be retrieved and documented, as they may be unique to the owner and may lead to identification of that individual.RidgeologyFriction ridge skin from the hands and feet can be used for identification purposes.Prints are taken from deceased persons or human remains. They can be compared with those that have either been taken at an earlier time or have been gathered as part of antemortem procedures. An individual’s fingerprints may have been taken previously and added to IDENT1, or the United Kingdom Border Force databases.A team of fingerprint specialists and crime scene investigators should physically take the prints. A recognised fingerprint expert should quality assure the recovery process.Prints may be used in the reconciliation process as part of identification.DNADNA profiling may be used as a primary tool to reunify remains and identify victims of mass fatality incidents. DNA profiling techniques may be particularly useful if the victims’ bodies are disrupted or decomposing. DNA may still be successfully obtained from teeth or bone samples in those cases.DNA profiling is a comparative technique. In order for the identification commission to make a positive identification, two different samples are required. The first is a post-mortem DNA sample taken from the victim. The second is a DNA sample collected during antemortem procedures from the person believed to be the potential victim.
In managing the DNA identification process, the SIM may need to establish a DNA reconciliation team. This team has three functions: DNA post-mortem team for sample profiling  DNA antemortem team for sample profiling DNA data reconciliation team for data matchingDNA samples may be used within the reconciliation process as part of identification.Forensic anthropologyThe human skeleton is a hard tissue that is resistant to decomposition and survives disruption. Forensic osteology is a sub-discipline of anthropology and can be of assistance when bones are being examined. The identification process involves selecting and cleaning bones for examination. This can be done in a mortuary.Benefits of an osteological examinationAn osteological examination may provide information on:  age sex racial characteristics  physical stature congenital and developmental disease  medical conditions healed fractures anomalies or abnormalities, including surgical hardware and prosthetic devices  perimortem trauma (trauma caused during death) the anatomical location of body parts distinction between human and non-human materialCT scanningHM coroner or procurator fiscal or pathologist may wish to perform CT scanning to assist in identifying a body or material. CT scanning can be used for the whole body and the teeth to find clues to the cause or manner of death. A CT scan can diagnose a specific injury, disease or abnormality. It may also help to screen deceased persons or human remains for foreign material such as: pacemakers  implants metallic items explosives devices  firearm projectilesCT scanning is of particular use in response to a CBRN mass fatality incident, as it enables the pathology team to view the contents of a body bag in detail before exposing themselves to the risk of opening the bag.
Investigative human samplesAll requests for invasive forensic procedures regarding deceased persons or human remains (including removing samples, organs or limbs) must be made to HM coroner or procurator fiscal. These processes should only be done in accordance with the Human Tissue Act 2004.Samples taken during a post-mortem examination or under a special examination may have separate or dual status under coronial jurisdiction and as evidence under the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984. The SIO and SIM should agree on the nature of samples required for investigation and identification purposes. The decisions that come under dual jurisdiction should be recorded in the respective policy books. Once agreed, they should consult HM coroner or procurator fiscal or to authorise the samples to be taken. The lead pathologist may arrange for these samples to be taken in conjunction with the PMOC.The deceased’s next of kin should be kept informed in respect of any samples taken during the post-mortem process. They should be informed why the samples were taken, as well as the retention arrangements. HM coroner or procurator fiscal and the SIM should discuss and agree the most appropriate way for the family to be informed. This will be either by the FLO or HM coroner or procurator fiscal’s officer.Aftercare of the deceasedAfter the identification examination process, deceased persons and human remains are stored in a new body bag with the same label details. Using colour-coded bags at this stage may assist the system for storing the deceased.Viewing the deceasedThe MFCG should consider the options for the family and/or bereaved to view the deceased. This should take place at either: a funeral director’s premises after the deceased person or human remains have been released by HM coroner or procurator fiscal a designated family viewing area at a location separate from a main emergency mortuaryThe mortuary management team should consider the privacy, confidentiality and dignity of the deceased and their family.If the bereaved wish to view, this process should be facilitated and will normally take place once formal identification has been confirmed. Each case will be unique, and it should be carefully explained to the bereaved that it may be necessary for investigators to put special arrangements in place.Viewing arrangementsWhere viewing arrangements are available, HM coroner or procurator fiscal’s office will give the next of kin information on arrangements for viewing the body as soon as possible, if they wish to do so. In all cases, HM coroner or procurator fiscal’s office will advise the next of kin or their representative of the procedure for viewing the body, the family and/or bereaved should be briefed by an FLC or FLO on mortuary and viewing procedures.
The PMOC will maintain a log of all visitors and will ensure that suitable arrangements are in place for any visitors to the facility, including crime scene log protocols. All visits should comply with health and safety and risk management advice and guidance.Releasing the deceasedHM coroner or procurator fiscal will authorise the release of the deceased to their family and complete the appropriate documentation. Assumptions should not be made about the identification of a family. Difficulty may arise where the deceased has been estranged from the whole or part of their family prior to their death or may have relationships with people who are unknown to other members of the family.Where a situation exists that the deceased person’s family cannot be reconciled in order to be assisted by one FLO, the SIM may decide to treat elements of one family separately and appoint more than one FLO to separate elements of the same family.During the identification process, the FLO and/or HM coroner or procurator fiscal’s officer should make the bereaved aware of the condition of the deceased. They should then ascertain the family’s wishes regarding the release of the deceased person or human remains. The FLO or HM coroner or procurator fiscal’s officer should also discuss with the bereaved what is likely to happen if further human remains are recovered and identified during the investigation. The bereaved should be asked about their wishes for those human remains and whether or not they may consent to any communal arrangements. The family’s wishes should be relayed to HM coroner or procurator fiscal.Fragmented and commingled human remainsWhere fragmented and commingled human remains cause additional challenges, families should be consulted as to their preferred release and repatriation options. Some families may choose to wait for the end of an operation before any repatriation or funeral. Other families may have different wishes, such as whether or not they are informed regarding any further identification of additional remains.Unclaimed deceasedHM coroner or procurator fiscal decides on the procedures in cases of deceased persons who remain unclaimed.If a deceased person is unclaimed, local authorities arrange for burial or cremation in accordance with their statutory obligation imposed by the Public Health (Control of Disease) Act 1984. Such a disposal should be in accordance with any identified faith requirements. In circumstances where the next of kin is identified, but does not wish to claim the deceased, they must still be advised of the time, date and location of a burial or cremation.EvidenceFragments of evidence may be recovered at the mortuary or discovered during radiography or during a post- mortem examination. In terrorist incidents, trained exhibits officers from the counter terrorism unit are attached to the mortuary in order to provide specialist skills for processes such as the forensic examination, retrieval, recording and storage of samples and property. Counter Terrorism policing is responsible for the safe keeping of all exhibits recovered following a terrorist incident.Property
Caution should be used before cleaning, restoring or disposal of property without first consulting family members through the FLC and FLO. Certain faiths require that all parts of a deceased person are buried or cremated. This may include bloodstained clothing. In addition to ascertaining the wishes of families,the SIM or SIO should seek advice on the health and safety implications of returning unclean items to relatives. A photograph of each item should be retained before the item is returned to family members.Following a mass fatality incident, it is likely that a great deal of property will need to be collected and managed. In these circumstances, the SIM may appoint a property manager. In the event of a third part provider being appointed, the property manager will oversee the implementation of the property strategy. This will include plans for arbitration of any disputes of ownership.Property managerThe property manager implements the predetermined strategies on identifying, investigating, obtaining or seizing, retaining and returning personal property and evidence. They must also complete the appropriate documentation.Their responsibilities include: ensuring that all property is stored securely documenting all decisions and the rationale for themReconciliation proceduresReconciliation is the process by which data collected during antemortem procedures is analysed against the data collected during post-mortem procedures, in order to identify the deceased and reunite human remains from the same human body.The SIM should create an identification strategy. This should include the: manner in which the process will be undertaken  appointment of a reconciliation coordinator membership of the reconciliation investigation unit  use of information systems technology use of unique features to make provisional identifications format of the reports to be sent from the reconciliation investigation unit to the identification commissionThe reconciliation coordinator should be in frequent contact with the AMC and the CB manager to ensure that information is passed between the two teams. The PMOC also provides the reconciliation investigation unit with relevant information regarding the examinations of the deceased.The reconciliation coordinator should ensure that procedures are in place to make provisional identifications as soon as possible. The SIM should have a strategy on: the communication of information to and from the family. No information should be passed to relatives without the approval of the SIM and HM coroner or procurator fiscal. the information that will be provided to families and friends at which stage of the identification process
 the issue of early provisional identification criteria (possible, probable and established identification)Reconciliation coordinatorThe reconciliation coordinator should be a trained DVI manager such as a PMOC or in complex and protracted incidents a trained SIM with knowledge of the DVI process and forensic techniques. They may have a team of people, including specialists, who are independent of the data collection processes.The role of the reconciliation coordinator is to: liaise with the SIM to implement the identification strategy and reconciliation process  coordinate activities within the reconciliation investigation unit ensure that all reconciliation unit staff are equipped, trained and qualified  ensure that there is continuity within the identification process assume responsibility for all aspects of documentation in relation to the identification process  ensure the quality control of submissions, including the return of any samples to the victim collate and manage data captured from antemortem and post-mortem procedures in respect of each victim  Utilise technological solutions for data collection and analysis ensure compliance with the Human Tissue Act 2004 liaise with the FLC, CB manager and forensic providers manage the health, safety, welfare and wellbeing of all personnel in the reconciliation unit, ensuring that the appropriate risk assessments are documented document all personal decisions and the rationale for them coordinate logistical support and security for the reconciliation unit  compose reconciliation files for HM coroner or procurator fiscal act as presenting officer at the identification commission, as appropriateReconciliation investigation unitThe reconciliation investigation unit collates and matches data collected during post-mortem procedures with data collected during antemortem procedures. It processes textual and scientific data to support the identification process. The reconciliation team will prepare a file of evidence for presenting to the identification board or commission.The core functions of the unit include: processing post-mortem and antemortem data and physical exhibits establishing victim identifications by forensic specialists in ridgeology, DNA and forensic odontology  validating potential forensic identifications preparing reconciliation files for established identifications, prior to presentation at the identification commissionReconciliation filesThe reconciliation coordinator is responsible for preparing reconciliation files on behalf of the SIM for presentation at the identification commission.The report should contain a summary capturing:
 family name of the deceased  forenames of the deceased name by which known to family and friends  date of birth place of birth  nationality missing person nominal number(s)  disaster victim number(s)Responsibility for reconciliation standards and training rests with the College of Policing.Police mortuary operations coordinators are trained in the function of coordinating reconciliation investigations (room manager) which includes compilation of the identification report. Senior identification managers are also trained in coordinating reconciliation investigations. For large or more complex incidents, consideration should be given at an early stage to the appointment of a qualified SIM to undertake the role of reconciliation coordinator.Principles of equality, diversity and inclusivity should be applied, considered and reflected in both approach and terminology. In written reports, inclusive language should be used to ensure respect for individuals’ identities, avoiding terms or descriptions that could be exclusionary or offensive.Reconciliation reports should always reflect INTERPOL identification standards using the internationally approved documentation. However, when issues relating specifically to United Kingdom legislation (for example, the Equality Act 2010) guidance and procedures, when protected characteristics relating to gender identity, sex or sexual orientation are being discussed, investigators should be aware of biases and assumptions.Principles of equality, diversity and inclusion should be considered and reflected in their approach and terminology. Language and communication styles can be perceived as offensive and discriminatory, andcan cause upset to victims and bereaved families so we should be respectful and inclusive in our language and in our communication styles.Investigators may refer to a gender recognition certificate (GRC) if one has been provided and liaise with the HM coroner or procurator fiscal prior to the inquest, regarding any inconsistency in documentation or description which relates to the victim's biological sex at birth and gender identity at death.Concerning the record of Inquest which may have recorded biological sex at birth and gender at death. Should this bring to light considerations that the bereaved families need to be aware of, then this should be dealt with in a sensitive and a compassionate manner prior to any publication. HM coroner or procurator fiscal may also choose to record the birth name (as on the birth certificate) as well as any other name used subsequently, as well as gender pronouns.Identification board or commissionThis is a formal step in the DVI process. In the UK, HM coroner or procurator fiscal hears evidence and approves official identification of the deceased. It is chaired by HM coroner or procurator fiscal, who decide whether an identify has been established.The formal Identification commission may be convened for larger incidents, often where citizens of a number of countries are involved. Countries that have lost citizens may be allowed to participate in or observe the
The format and location of the identification board or commission will be a decision for HM coroner or procurator fiscal. For operations involving a low or manageable number of fatalities, successful identification may take place in a less formal setting. Whatever the scale of the operation, a reconciliation file detailing how identification has been achieved needs to be completed and presented to HM coroner or procurator fiscal.Careful consideration needs to be given to any information released to families prior to formal establishment of identity by the identification board. Prematurely informing families that a case is to be presented for identification can cause problems and is not recommended. This is particularly the case where the panel defers the case and decides that further investigation is required.RepatriationOnce a deceased person has been formally identified, HM coroner or procurator fiscal orders the formal release and repatriation of the deceased person or human remains to the agreed next of kin.In consultation with HM coroner or procurator fiscal officer, the FLO will determine the wishes of the family and/or bereaved regarding repatriation of the deceased person and their personal property. This information is then given to HM coroner or procurator fiscal and the SIM. If the deceased is a foreign national, the deceased person’s embassy or consul may advise the repatriation officer of the wishes of the next of kin.There are strict international rules in respect of the carriage of a deceased person or human remains abroad. An undertaker with the necessary experience should be consulted. If appropriate, the undertaker should complete the necessary forms and procedures on behalf of the repatriation officer and the next of kin.‘Out of England’ authority guidanceRegardless of how or when a death occurred, the next of kin may wish to remove a deceased person or human remains from England and Wales for burial or cremation elsewhere. In these circumstances, HM coroner or procurator fiscal should be asked to grant an ‘Out of England’ authority. HM coroner or procurator fiscal will consider any request and make a judicial decision on whether the deceased person or human remains can be released, or whether they need to be retained. The ‘Out of England’ authority should contain the unique reference number(s) allocated to that deceased person or human remains during the victim recovery process.Back to Disaster victim identification overviewTagsCivil emergencies
https://www.college.police.uk/app/investigation/investigative-interviewing/reference-material-national- policing-position-papers
Page
Reference material – National policing position papersThis page is from APP, the official source of professional practice for policing. First published23 October 2013 Updated17 November 2020Written by College of Policing Investigative interviewing1 min readThese position statements provide practical guidance and support to operational officers and staff conducting, supervising or advising investigative interviewing.They have been developed by subject matter experts and experienced, skilled practitioners with the support of the National Crime Agency and College of Policing. They are reference material endorsed by the National Policing Lead for Investigative Interviewing. Prepared statements  Urgent interviews Witness intermediaries  Sentencing guidelines TICs (taken into consideration)  Truth and lies DNA and fingerprints  Interview supporters Interviewing child witnesses in major crime  Defence witnesses Remote monitoring Self-administered interview tool  Use of polygraphs Necessity to arrest Voluntary interviews Pre-interview briefingsBack to Investigative interviewing overview
TagsInvestigation Investigative interviewing
24/03/2025  Reference material – National policing position papershttps://www.college.police.uk/app/investigation/investigative-interviewing/reference-material-national- policing-position-papers
Page
Reference material – National policing position papersThis page is from APP, the official source of professional practice for policing. First published23 October 2013 Updated17 November 2020Written by College of Policing Investigative interviewing1 min readThese position statements provide practical guidance and support to operational officers and staff conducting, supervising or advising investigative interviewing.They have been developed by subject matter experts and experienced, skilled practitioners with the support of the National Crime Agency and College of Policing. They are reference material endorsed by the National Policing Lead for Investigative Interviewing. Prepared statements  Urgent interviews Witness intermediaries  Sentencing guidelines TICs (taken into consideration)  Truth and lies DNA and fingerprints  Interview supporters Interviewing child witnesses in major crime  Defence witnesses Remote monitoring Self-administered interview tool  Use of polygraphs Necessity to arrest Voluntary interviews Pre-interview briefingsBack to Investigative interviewing overview
TagsInvestigation Investigative interviewing
Status: This is the original version (as it was originally enacted). This item of legislation is currently only available in its original format.Police (Ethics, Conduct and Scrutiny) (Scotland) Act 20252025 asp 5The Bill for this Act of the Scottish Parliament was passed by the Parliament on 15th January 2025 and received Royal Assent on 4th March 2025An Act of the Scottish Parliament to make provision about a code of ethics and a duty of candour for the police; to make provision about vetting of constables and police staff; to make provision about procedures for misconduct and the consequences of certain conduct by constables; to make provision about the functions of the Police Investigations and Review Commissioner; and to make provision for a board to advise the Police Investigations and Review Commissioner.References to Acts1 Meaning of “2006 Act” and “2012 Act”In this Act—(a) the “2006 Act” means the Police, Public Order and Criminal Justice (Scotland) Act 2006,(b) the “2012 Act” means the Police and Fire Reform (Scotland) Act 2012.Ethics of the police2 Code of ethics(1) The 2012 Act is amended as follows.(2) In Part 1, after Chapter 4, insert—(1) 
2	Police (Ethics, Conduct and Scrutiny) (Scotland) Act 2025 asp 5 Chapter 4A – Code of ethics Document Generated: 2025-03-04Status: This is the original version (as it was originally enacted). This item of legislation is currently only available in its original format.“CHAPTER 4ACODE OF ETHICS36A Code of ethics(1) The chief constable must prepare a code of ethics for the Police Service (to be known as “the Code of Ethics for Policing in Scotland”) as soon as is reasonably practicable after section 2 of the Police (Ethics, Conduct and Scrutiny) (Scotland) Act 2025 comes into force.(2) The code of ethics is a code which sets out the values of the Police Service and expectations relating to the conduct and practice of its constables and of police staff.(3) The chief constable must involve the Authority in the preparation of the code of ethics and the Authority must provide the chief constable with such assistance as the chief constable may reasonably require in that regard.(4) In preparing the code of ethics, the chief constable must have regard to—(a) the policing principles set out in section 32,(b) the standards of behaviour referred to in section 52(2)(a)(i),(c) the European Code of Police Ethics adopted as Recommendation Rec(2001)10 of the Committee of Ministers to member states on the European Code of Police Ethics, by the Committee of Ministers on 19 September 2001 at the 765th meeting of the Ministers’ deputies,(d) the United Nations’ Code of Conduct for Law Enforcement Officials, adopted by General Assembly resolution 34/169 of 17 December 1979,(e) the United Nations’ Basic Principles on the Use of Force and Firearms by Law Enforcement Officials, adopted by the Eighth United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders, Havana, Cuba, 27 August to 7 September 1990,(f) Convention rights within the meaning of section 1 of the Human Rights Act 1998,(g) the rights and obligations set out in the schedule of the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child (Incorporation) (Scotland) Act 2024, and(h) such other human rights contained in any international convention, treaty or other international instrument ratified by the United Kingdom as the chief constable considers relevant.(5) The chief constable must—(a) publish the code of ethics on a website maintained by or on behalf of the Police Service and in such other manner as the chief constable considers appropriate,(b) lay a copy of it before the Scottish Parliament, and(c) secure that—(a) 
Police (Ethics, Conduct and Scrutiny) (Scotland) Act 2025 asp 5	3Chapter 4A – Code of ethicsDocument Generated: 2025-03-04Status: This is the original version (as it was originally enacted). This item of legislation is currently only available in its original format.(i) all such steps are taken as the chief constable considers necessary to ensure that all constables and police staff have read and understood it, and(ii) a record is made and kept by the chief constable of the steps taken in relation to each constable and member of staff.36B Preparation and revision of the code of ethics(1) When preparing the code of ethics under section 36A(1), the chief constable must—(a) consult and share a draft with—(i) the persons specified in schedule 2ZA, and(ii) such other persons as the chief constable considers appropriate, and(b) consider any representations made.(2) The chief constable—(a) may review the code of ethics from time to time,(b) must review it at least once during each 5 year period beginning with the day on which the code, a revised code or a statement under paragraph (c)(ii) is laid and must, in particular, do so if any of the things mentioned in paragraphs (a) or (b) of section 36A(4) have been significantly revised, and(c) following such a review, must—(i) revise the code of ethics, or(ii) lay a statement before the Scottish Parliament of the reasons why, having undertaken a review, the chief constable has concluded that there is no need to revise it.(3) Section 36A(2) to (5) and subsections (1) and (2) apply to a revised code of ethics as they apply to the code of ethics prepared under section 36A(1).(4) The chief constable must, when laying a copy of a revised code of ethics before the Scottish Parliament, also lay a statement before the Parliament which—(a) summarises any representations made during consultation under subsection (1),(b) where any representation has not resulted in a revision to the code of ethics, gives reasons for that.(5) The Scottish Ministers may by regulations modify schedule 2ZA by—(a) adding a person, or(b) removing, or modifying the description of, a person for the time being mentioned there.”.(3) In section 10(1) (constable’s declaration), after “impartiality,” insert “that I will follow the Code of Ethics for Policing in Scotland”.(4) In section 17 (chief constable’s responsibility for the policing of Scotland)—(a) in subsection (2), after paragraph (d), insert—“(da)	is to prepare the Code of Ethics for Policing in Scotland (see section 36A),”,
4	Police (Ethics, Conduct and Scrutiny) (Scotland) Act 2025 asp 5 Chapter 4A – Code of ethics Document Generated: 2025-03-04Status: This is the original version (as it was originally enacted). This item of legislation is currently only available in its original format.(b) in subsection (4)(a), after “policing principles” insert “and the Code of Ethics for Policing in Scotland”.(5) In section 125 (subordinate legislation), after subsection (2), insert—“(2A) Regulations under section 36B(5) are subject to the affirmative procedure.”.(6) After schedule 2, insert—“SCHEDULE 2ZA(introduced by section 36B)PERSONS TO BE CONSULTED IN RESPECT OF THECODE OF ETHICS FOR POLICING IN SCOTLAND1 The Scottish Ministers.2 The Lord Advocate.3 His Majesty’s Inspectorate of Constabulary in Scotland.4 The Police Investigations and Review Commissioner.5 The Scottish Commission for Human Rights.6 The Commission for Equality and Human Rights.7 The joint central committee of the Police Federation for Scotland.8 Such persons as appear to the chief constable to be representative of senior officers.9 Such persons as appear to the chief constable to be representative of superintendents (including chief superintendents).10 Such persons as appear to the chief constable to represent the collective interests of police staff.11 Such persons as appear to the chief constable to represent groups of individual constables or members of police staff, or both, characterised by reference to one or more of the following characteristics—(a) disability,(b) race, colour, nationality, or ethnic or national origins,(c) religion,(d) sex,(e) sexual orientation,(f) transgender identity.12 Such persons appearing to the chief constable to represent the interests of individuals or groups of individuals who have made a complaint about the Authority, the Police Service or a person serving with the police, as the chief constable considers appropriate.”.3 Duty of candour(1) The 2012 Act is amended in accordance with subsections (2) and (3).
Police (Ethics, Conduct and Scrutiny) (Scotland) Act 2025 asp 5	5Chapter 4B – Vetting code of practiceDocument Generated: 2025-03-04Status: This is the original version (as it was originally enacted). This item of legislation is currently only available in its original format.(2) In section 10(1) (constable’s declaration), after “fairness,” insert “candour,”.(3) In section 32 (policing principles)—(a) the word “and” following paragraph (a) is repealed,(b) after paragraph (b), insert “, and(c) that the Police Service should be candid and co-operative in proceedings, including all investigations.”.(4) In schedule 1 of the Police Service of Scotland (Senior Officers) (Conduct) Regulations 2013 (S.S.I. 2013/62) (standards of professional behaviour), after the paragraph headed “Honesty and integrity”, insert—CandourConstables act with candour and are open and truthful in their dealings, without favour to their own interests or the interests of the Police Service subject, in particular, to the reasonable assertion of the privilege against self-incrimination.Constables attend interviews and assist and participate in proceedings (including all investigations) openly, promptly and professionally, in line with the expectations of a police constable.”.(5) In schedule 1 of the Police Service of Scotland (Conduct) Regulations 2014 (S.S.I. 2014/68) (standards of professional behaviour), after the paragraph headed “Honesty and integrity”, insert—CandourConstables act with candour and are open and truthful in their dealings, without favour to their own interests or the interests of the Police Service subject, in particular, to the reasonable assertion of the privilege against self-incrimination.Constables attend interviews and assist and participate in proceedings (including all investigations) openly, promptly and professionally, in line with the expectations of a police constable.”.Police vetting4 Vetting code of practice(1) The 2012 Act is amended as follows.(2) In Part 1, after Chapter 4A (inserted by section 2), insert—“CHAPTER 4BVETTING CODE OF PRACTICE36C Vetting code of practice(1) The chief constable must prepare a code of practice for the vetting of constables and police staff (referred to in this section and section 36D as “the vetting code of practice”).(1) 
6	Police (Ethics, Conduct and Scrutiny) (Scotland) Act 2025 asp 5 Chapter 4B – Vetting code of practice Document Generated: 2025-03-04Status: This is the original version (as it was originally enacted). This item of legislation is currently only available in its original format.(2) The chief constable must prepare the vetting code of practice as soon as is reasonably practicable after section 4 of the Police (Ethics, Conduct and Scrutiny) (Scotland) Act 2025 comes into force but—(a) the chief constable is not to carry out any consultation under section 36D(1) until the chief constable has, in accordance with section 54(2)(a)(i), received a draft of the first set of regulations to be made under section 48 in pursuance of section 50A (ongoing vetting of constables),(b) the vetting code of practice does not have effect until those regulations come into force.(3) In this section, “vetting” is an assessment as to a person’s suitability, having regard, insofar as they relate to the ethical standards and behaviour expected of constables or (as the case may be) police staff, to the person’s character and personal circumstances, to—(a) hold the office of constable or a particular rank or role,(b) be a member of police staff or to hold a particular role as a member of police staff.(4) The vetting code of practice must, in respect of the vetting of police staff, provide for—(a) a person to undergo vetting—(i) periodically, and(ii) if a reason to do so arises,(b) circumstances in which a person who has undergone vetting is to be—(i) required to comply with conditions (including as to the person's personal circumstances),(ii) redeployed,(iii) demoted,(iv) dismissed (with or without notice).(5) Provision in the vetting code of practice about the vetting of constables and police staff must include provision about the types of evidence required to demonstrate that the person who has undergone vetting is not suitable to—(a) hold the office of constable or a particular rank or role,(b) be a member of police staff or to hold a particular role as a member of police staff.(6) The vetting code of practice must include provision for written reasons to be provided if, as a result of the vetting of constables and police staff, a person who has undergone vetting is to be—(a) required to comply with conditions (including as to the person’s personal circumstances),(b) redeployed,(c) demoted,(d) dismissed (with or without notice).(7) Provision in the vetting code of practice about the vetting of constables and police staff may, in particular, include provision about—(a) the frequency of vetting of a person (but see also section 50A(2)(c)),(a) 
Police (Ethics, Conduct and Scrutiny) (Scotland) Act 2025 asp 5	7Chapter 4B – Vetting code of practiceDocument Generated: 2025-03-04Status: This is the original version (as it was originally enacted). This item of legislation is currently only available in its original format.(b) circumstances in which there will or may be a reason to carry out vetting,(c) different categories of vetting to be carried out in different circumstances,(d) steps that may be taken where certain information is disclosed by vetting.(8) But the code may not include any provision which is inconsistent with provision in regulations made under section 48 in pursuance of section 50A (ongoing vetting of constables).(9) The chief constable may prepare more than one vetting code of practice in order to make different provision for different categories of person, roles or other purposes, and a reference to the vetting code of practice in this section or in section 36D is to be construed accordingly.(10) The chief constable must involve the Authority in the preparation of the vetting code of practice and the Authority must provide the chief constable with such assistance as the chief constable may reasonably require in that regard.(11) The chief constable must—(a) publish the vetting code of practice on a website maintained by or on behalf of the Police Service and in such other manner as the chief constable considers appropriate, and(b) lay a copy of it before the Scottish Parliament.36D Preparation and revision of the code of vetting practice(1) When preparing the vetting code of practice under section 36C(1), the chief constable must—(a) consult and share a draft with—(i) the Scottish Ministers,(ii) His Majesty’s Inspectorate of Constabulary in Scotland,(iii) the joint central committee of the Police Federation for Scotland,(iv) such persons as appear to the chief constable to be representative of senior officers,(v) such persons as appear to the chief constable to be representative of superintendents (including chief superintendents),(vi) such persons as appear to the chief constable to represent the collective interests of police staff,(vii) such persons as appear to the chief constable to represent groups of individual constables or members of police staff, or both, characterised by reference to one or more of the following characteristics—(A) disability,(B) race, colour, nationality, or ethnic or national origins,(C) religion,(D) sex,(A) 
8	Police (Ethics, Conduct and Scrutiny) (Scotland) Act 2025 asp 5 Chapter 4B – Vetting code of practice Document Generated: 2025-03-04Status: This is the original version (as it was originally enacted). This item of legislation is currently only available in its original format.(E) sexual orientation,(F) transgender identity,(viii) such other persons as the chief constable considers appropriate, and(b) consider any representations made.(2) The chief constable—(a) may review the vetting code of practice from time to time,(b) must review it at least once during each 5 year period beginning with the day on which the code, a revised code or a statement under paragraph (c)(ii) is laid, and(c) following such a review, must—(i) revise the vetting code of practice, or(ii) lay a statement before the Scottish Parliament that, having undertaken a review, the chief constable has concluded that there is no need to revise it.(3) Section 36C(2) to (11) and subsections (1) and (2) apply to a revised vetting code of practice as they apply to the vetting code of practice prepared under section 36C(1).”.5 Procedures for vetting(1) The 2012 Act is amended as follows.(2) After section 50, insert—“50A Ongoing vetting(1) Regulations made under section 48 must provide for—(a) constables to undergo vetting—(i) periodically, and(ii) if a reason to do so arises,(b) circumstances in which a constable who has undergone vetting is to be—(i) demoted,(ii) dismissed (with or without notice).(2) Such regulations may make provision for—(a) circumstances other than those mentioned in subsection (1)(a) in which constables must undergo vetting,(b) the process to be followed in the carrying out of vetting,(c) a minimum frequency for vetting of individual constables,(d) vetting to be carried out by a person holding such office, rank or role as is specified in the regulations,(e) a duty for constables to disclose such changes in their personal circumstances as are specified in the regulations,(f) a duty for constables to co-operate with any vetting they undergo,(g) circumstances in which a constable who has undergone vetting is to be—(a) 
Police (Ethics, Conduct and Scrutiny) (Scotland) Act 2025 asp 5	9Chapter 4B – Vetting code of practiceDocument Generated: 2025-03-04Status: This is the original version (as it was originally enacted). This item of legislation is currently only available in its original format.(i) required to comply with conditions (including as to the constable’s personal circumstances),(ii) redeployed,(h) appeals against determinations mentioned in subsection (1)(b) and paragraph (g),(i) circumstances in which constables may, pending the completion of vetting or an appeal, be—(i) required to comply with conditions (including as to the person’s personal circumstances),(ii) suspended from duty,(iii) redeployed,(j) the steps to be taken if a matter which is or may be the subject of a person’s vetting is or may be the subject of—(i) criminal proceedings,(ii) proceedings for dealing with a constable whose standard of behaviour or performance is unsatisfactory brought under procedures set out in regulations made under section 48.(3) In this section, “vetting” is an assessment as to a constable’s suitability, having regard, insofar as they relate to the ethical standards and behaviour expected of constables, to the constable’s character and personal circumstances, to hold the office of constable or a particular rank or role.”.Police conduct6 Liability of the Scottish Police Authority for unlawful conduct of the chief constableIn section 24 of the 2012 Act (liability for unlawful conduct)—(a) after subsection (3), insert—“(3A) The Authority is liable in respect of any unlawful conduct on the part of the chief constable in the carrying out (or purported carrying out) of the chief constable’s functions in the same manner as an employer is liable in respect of any unlawful conduct on the part of an employee in the course of employment.”,(b) in subsection (4), for “(3)” substitute “(3A)”.7 Procedures for misconduct: functions of the Police Investigations and Review CommissionerIn section 52 of the 2012 Act (disciplinary procedures: conduct and performance), in paragraph (d) of subsection (2) for “investigations of whether a constable has been engaged in misconduct” substitute “procedures for dealing with a constable whose standard of behaviour is unsatisfactory”.8 Procedures for misconduct: former constablesIn section 52 of the 2012 Act (disciplinary procedures: conduct and performance)—(a) in subsection (2), after paragraph (e), insert—(a) 
10	Police (Ethics, Conduct and Scrutiny) (Scotland) Act 2025 asp 5 Chapter 4B – Vetting code of practice Document Generated: 2025-03-04Status: This is the original version (as it was originally enacted). This item of legislation is currently only available in its original format.“(f ) applying the procedures for dealing with a constable whose standard of behaviour is unsatisfactory (with or without modification) in relation to a person who has ceased to be a constable.”,(b) after subsection (2), insert—“(2A) Such regulations, if they provide for procedures for dealing with a constable whose standard of behaviour is unsatisfactory to be applied in relation to a person who has ceased to be a constable—(a) must provide for—(i) an allegation of unsatisfactory behaviour against such a person to be investigated in accordance with those procedures only where the allegation is of behaviour while the person was a constable which would amount to gross misconduct,(ii) notice to be given to a person, following a determination that the allegation against the person is of behaviour which would amount to gross misconduct, that the procedures may be applied in relation to a person who ceases to be a constable,(iii) a decision to be made as to how the person would have been dealt with, had the person still been a constable, and(b) must provide for a period of time, not exceeding one year, running from the date on which the person ceased to be a constable, after which time, unless such criteria as are specified in the regulations are met—(i) the procedures do not apply to the person, or(ii) such steps in the procedures as are specified in the regulations may not be taken in relation to the person.(2B) In subsection (2A)(b), criteria specified must include that it would be in the public interest for the procedures to apply to the person.”,(c) after subsection (4), insert—“(5) In subsection (2A)(a)(i), “gross misconduct” means a breach of the standards of behaviour referred to in subsection (2)(a)(i) so serious that demotion in rank or dismissal would be justified.”.9 Scottish police advisory list and Scottish police barred list(1) The 2012 Act is amended as follows.(2) In Part 1, after Chapter 9, insert—(1) 
Police (Ethics, Conduct and Scrutiny) (Scotland) Act 2025 asp 5	11Chapter 9A – Advisory list and barred listDocument Generated: 2025-03-04Status: This is the original version (as it was originally enacted). This item of legislation is currently only available in its original format.“CHAPTER 9AADVISORY LIST AND BARRED LIST59A Scottish police advisory list and Scottish police barred list(1) The Authority must establish and maintain—(a) the Scottish police advisory list (“the advisory list”), and(b) the Scottish police barred list (“the barred list”).(2) The Authority must enter a person on the advisory list if—(a) in the circumstances set out in subsection (3), the person ceases to be a constable, or(b) where the person was (but is no longer) a constable, disciplinary proceedings are brought against the person in respect of an allegation of gross misconduct.(3) The circumstances referred to in subsection (2) are that—(a) before the person ceased to be a constable, disciplinary proceedings were brought against the person in respect of an allegation of gross misconduct, and(b) those proceedings have not concluded when the person ceases to be a constable.(4) The Authority must enter a person on the barred list if—(a) the person is dismissed as a constable in disciplinary proceedings against the person,(b) the person was (but is no longer) a constable and a decision is made in such proceedings that the person would have been dismissed as a constable, had the person still been a constable, or(c) the person is dismissed as a constable after undergoing vetting, within the meaning of section 50A(3), in accordance with regulations made under section 48.(5) The following persons must consult the advisory list and the barred list before employing or otherwise appointing a person—(a) the Authority,(b) His Majesty’s Inspectorate of Constabulary in Scotland,(c) the Police Service of Scotland,(d) the Police Investigations and Review Commissioner.(6) The Scottish Ministers must by regulations make provision for notice to be given to a person who is to be entered in or removed from, the advisory list or the barred list.(7) The Scottish Ministers may by regulations make provision for or about—(a) information to be included in the advisory list or the barred list in respect of a person on that list,(b) circumstances in which a person—(a) 
12	Police (Ethics, Conduct and Scrutiny) (Scotland) Act 2025 asp 5 Chapter 9A – Advisory list and barred list Document Generated: 2025-03-04Status: This is the original version (as it was originally enacted). This item of legislation is currently only available in its original format.(i) who would otherwise require to be entered on the advisory list or the barred list is not to be so entered, or(ii) is to be removed from the advisory list or the barred list,(c) notice to be given to the Authority by a person specified in the regulations of a person who is to be entered in, or removed from, the advisory list or the barred list,(d) the consequences of a person being on the advisory list or the barred list, including in particular provision preventing the employment or other appointment of a person on the barred list by a person specified in the regulations,(e) persons who must consult the advisory list and the barred list before employing or otherwise appointing a person,(f) circumstances in which information about a person which is included in the advisory list or the barred list may be shared by the Authority,(g) circumstances in which information about a person which is included in the barred list may be published by the Authority,(h) the delegation by the Authority of its functions in relation to the advisory list or the barred list,(i) such other matters in connection with the lists as the Scottish Ministers consider appropriate.(8) Regulations under subsection (7) may modify this or any enactment.(9) Before making regulations under subsection (7), the Scottish Ministers must consult—(a) the chief constable,(b) the Authority,(c) the joint central committee of the Police Federation for Scotland, and(d) such other persons as they consider appropriate.(10) In this section—“disciplinary proceedings” means proceedings (including any investigation) in respect of alleged misconduct brought under the procedures for misconduct set out in regulations made under section 48, and a reference to such proceedings being brought is a reference to the person being notified that the person is the subject of such proceedings,“gross misconduct” has the meaning given by section 52(5).”.(3) In section 125 (subordinate legislation), after subsection (2A) (inserted by section 2(5)), insert—“(2B) Regulations under section 59A(6) and (7) are subject to the affirmative procedure.”.10 Procedures for misconduct: senior officers(1) The 2012 Act is amended as follows.(2) For subsection (3) of section 52 (disciplinary procedures: conduct and performance), substitute—“(3) Such regulations must provide for—
Police (Ethics, Conduct and Scrutiny) (Scotland) Act 2025 asp 5	13Chapter 9A – Advisory list and barred listDocument Generated: 2025-03-04Status: This is the original version (as it was originally enacted). This item of legislation is currently only available in its original format.(a) the Authority to determine any case which relates to the standard of performance of a senior officer,(b) a panel independent of the Authority to determine any case which relates to the standard of behaviour of a senior officer or a person who has ceased to be a senior officer.”.(3) In section 56 (right to appeal to police appeals tribunal)—(a) after subsection (1), insert—“(1A) A senior officer may appeal to a police appeals tribunal against any decision to take any other action against the senior officer, in pursuance of regulations made under section 48 which provide for procedures for dealing with a constable whose standard of behaviour is unsatisfactory.”,(b) after subsection (2), insert—“(2A) In this section, a reference to a constable or senior officer includes a person who was a constable or a senior officer, as the case may be.”.(4) In subsection (2) of section 58 (determinations by tribunal), for “dismissal or demotion in rank of” substitute “action against”.11 Review of policies, practices and guidance relating to misconduct(1) The chief constable must—(a) carry out a review of the Police Service’s policies, practices and guidance relating to misconduct by constables, and(b) make such changes to the policies, practices and guidance as the chief constable considers appropriate in light of the Code of Ethics for Policing in Scotland.(2) The chief constable must make any changes required by subsection (1) as soon as is reasonably practicable after the end of the review period.(3) In this section, “the review period” means the period of one year beginning with the day on which this section comes into force.Functions of the Police Investigations and Review Commissioner12 Investigations into matters involving persons serving with the policeIn section 33A of the 2006 Act (general functions of the Police Investigations and Review Commissioner)—(a) in paragraph (b)(i), for the words “serving with the police may have committed an offence” substitute “who is, or has been, a person serving with the police may have committed an offence (regardless of when those circumstances occurred)”,(b) in paragraph (b)(ii), after “2016” insert “, whether or not the circumstances occurred in the course of the person’s duty, employment or appointment”.(a) 
14	Police (Ethics, Conduct and Scrutiny) (Scotland) Act 2025 asp 5 Chapter 9A – Advisory list and barred list Document Generated: 2025-03-04Status: This is the original version (as it was originally enacted). This item of legislation is currently only available in its original format.13 Complaints made by persons serving with the police(1) In section 34 of the 2006 Act—(a) in subsection (3), after paragraph (a), insert—“(aa)	any statement made by a person serving with the police about an act or omission mentioned in subsection (3A);”,(b) after subsection (3), insert—“(3A) An act or omission referred to in subsection (3)(aa) is one which—(a) took place in relation to, or adversely affected, the person in the person’s capacity as a person serving with the police, or(b) was witnessed by the person (whether or not in that capacity).”,(c) in subsection (6), in each place where they occur, for the words “member of the public” substitute “person”.(2) The title of that section becomes “Meaning of “relevant complaint””.14 Complaint handling reviewsIn section 35 of the 2006 Act (examination of manner of handling of complaint)—(a) after subsection (1), insert—“(1A) The Commissioner may carry out a complaint handling review of the Commissioner’s own volition if satisfied that it is in the public interest to do so.(1B) The Commissioner must, as soon as reasonably practicable after deciding to carry out a complaint handling review under this section, notify the complainer of that decision.”,(b) in subsection (3)—(i) in paragraph (a), after sub-paragraph (ii), insert—“(iii) any recommendations in relation to the complaint that the Commissioner proposes to make to the appropriate authority as a result of the complaint handling review;”,(ii) in paragraph (b), for “and proposed action” substitute “, proposed action and recommendations”,(c) after subsection (4), insert—“(4A) Where the report includes recommendations in relation to the complaint, the appropriate authority must, within such period as is specified in the report, give the Commissioner a response in writing setting out—(a) details of what the authority has done, or proposes to do, in response to the recommendation, or(b) if the authority has not done, and does not intend to do, anything in response to the recommendation, the reasons for that.(4B) The Commissioner must, as soon as reasonably practicable after receiving the response, publish it in such manner as the Commissioner considers appropriate.
Police (Ethics, Conduct and Scrutiny) (Scotland) Act 2025 asp 5	15Chapter 9A – Advisory list and barred listDocument Generated: 2025-03-04Status: This is the original version (as it was originally enacted). This item of legislation is currently only available in its original format.(4C) But the Commissioner—(a) must withhold from publication any information in the response which would identify an individual (other than the chief constable),(b) may withhold the whole or part of the response from publication if the Commissioner considers that it is in the public interest to do so.”.15 Call-in of relevant complaints(1) The 2006 Act is amended as follows.(2) In section 35 (examination of manner of handling complaint)—(a) after subsection (2), insert—“(2A) This section does not apply in relation to a complaint which is being, or has been, considered by the Commissioner under section 40ZA(1).”,(b) in subsection (7)—(i) the words from “give a direction” to the end become paragraph (a),(ii) after that paragraph, insert “; or(b)  if satisfied that it is in the public interest for the Commissioner to do so, determine that the complaint is to be reconsidered by the Commissioner (see section 40ZA).”.(3) After section 40, insert—“40ZA Power of Commissioner to consider complaints(1) The Commissioner may consider a relevant complaint if—(a) the Commissioner determines under section 35(7)(b) (examination of manner of handling complaint) that the complaint is to be reconsidered by the Commissioner,(b) the appropriate authority in relation to the complaint requests the Commissioner to consider the complaint, or(c) the Commissioner—(i) has reasonable grounds to believe that the complaint has not been, or is not being, considered properly by the appropriate authority, and(ii) is satisfied that it is in the public interest for the Commissioner to consider the complaint.(2) For the purposes of subsection (1)(c), a complaint is not considered properly by the appropriate authority if the arrangements for handling relevant complaints maintained by the authority are not adhered to by the authority in its consideration of the complaint.(3) A complaint may be considered by the Commissioner under subsection (1)(b) or (c) whether or not—(1) 
16 Police (Ethics, Conduct and Scrutiny) (Scotland) Act 2025 asp 5 Chapter 9A – Advisory list and barred list Document Generated: 2025-03-04Status: This is the original version (as it was originally enacted). This item of legislation is currently only available in its original format.(a) the appropriate authority has completed its consideration of the complaint,(b) the Commissioner has—(i) discontinued, or not proceeded with, a complaint handling review in relation to the complaint under section 36(1), or(ii) ordered the discontinuance of a reconsideration of the complaint under section 39(1).(4) The Commissioner may consider a complaint under subsection (1)(c)—(a) at the request of the complainer, or(b) of the Commissioner’s own volition.(5) The Commissioner must consult the appropriate authority before deciding to consider a complaint under subsection (1)(c).(6) Where the complainer makes a request as mentioned in subsection (4)(a), the Commissioner may, instead of deciding to consider the complaint under subsection (1)(c), treat the request as if it were a request mentioned in section 35(1)(a).(7) Nothing in this section affects the ability of the complainer or the appropriate authority to make a request in relation to a complaint under section 35(1).(8) In this section and section 40ZB, in relation to a complaint, “the complainer” means the person who made the complaint.40ZB Report following Commissioner’s consideration of complaint(1) On completion of the Commissioner’s consideration of the complaint, the Commissioner must—(a) inform the persons mentioned in subsection (2) about—(i) the conclusions the Commissioner has drawn from that consideration and the reasons for them,(ii) what action (if any) the Commissioner proposes to take in consequence of those conclusions,(iii) any recommendations in relation to the complaint that the Commissioner proposes to make to the appropriate authority as a result of the Commissioner’s consideration of it,(b) draw up a report of the consideration of the complaint and the conclusions, reasons, proposed action and recommendations referred to in paragraph (a) and send it to the appropriate authority, and(c) if the Commissioner considers it appropriate to do so, publish the report drawn up under paragraph (b) in such manner as the Commissioner considers appropriate.(2) Those persons are—(a) the complainer, and(b) where the complaint is in respect of an act or omission by a person mentioned in section 34(2)(f) and identifies the person who is the subject of it, that person.(a) 
Police (Ethics, Conduct and Scrutiny) (Scotland) Act 2025 asp 5	17Chapter 9A – Advisory list and barred listDocument Generated: 2025-03-04Status: This is the original version (as it was originally enacted). This item of legislation is currently only available in its original format.(3) Where the report includes recommendations in relation to the complaint, the appropriate authority must, within such period as is specified in the report, give the Commissioner a response in writing setting out—(a) details of what the authority has done, or proposes to do, in response to the recommendation, or(b) if the authority has not done, and does not intend to do, anything in response to the recommendation, the reasons for that.(4) The Commissioner must, as soon as reasonably practicable after receiving the response, publish it in such manner as the Commissioner considers appropriate.(5) But the Commissioner—(a) must withhold from publication any information in the response which would identify an individual (other than the chief constable),(b) may withhold the whole or part of the response from publication if the Commissioner considers that it is in the public interest to do so.(6) Section 35(5), and any regulations made under that section, apply in relation to the duties imposed by subsection (1)(a) as they apply in relation to the duties imposed by section 35(3)(a).”.(4) In section 36 (duty of Commissioner not to proceed with certain complaint handling reviews), in subsection (4)(d), after “(c)” insert “and section 40ZA(1)”.(5) In section 39 (power of Commissioner to discontinue reconsideration), in subsection (3)(e), after “(d)” insert “and section 40ZA(1)”.(6) In section 41 (appropriate authority in relation to a complaint), in subsection (1), for “40” substitute “40ZB”.(7) In section 46A (protection from actions for defamation), in subsection (1)(a)—(a) in sub-paragraph (i), after “handling review” insert “, in considering a complaint under section 40ZA”,(b) in sub-paragraph (ii), after “review” insert “, consideration”,(c) in sub-paragraph (iii), after “review” insert “, consideration”.16 Review of arrangements for investigation of whistleblowing complaints(1) In section 40A of the 2006 Act—(a) in subsection (1)(a)—(i) the words from “the Commissioner” to “complaints;” become sub- paragraph (i),(ii) after that sub-paragraph, insert—“(ii) the Authority and the chief constable for the investigation of information provided in a whistleblowing complaint;”,(b) after subsection (1), insert—“(1A) In subsection (1)(a)(ii), “whistleblowing complaint” means a protected disclosure within the meaning of section 43A of the Employment Rights Act 1996 made to the Authority or, as the case may be, the chief constable.”.
18	Police (Ethics, Conduct and Scrutiny) (Scotland) Act 2025 asp 5 Chapter 9A – Advisory list and barred list Document Generated: 2025-03-04Status: This is the original version (as it was originally enacted). This item of legislation is currently only available in its original format.(2) The title of that section becomes “Arrangements for handling relevant complaints and investigation of whistleblowing complaints”.17 Investigations involving constables from outwith Scotland(1) The 2006 Act is amended as follows.(2) After section 41F, insert—“Investigations in relation to constables not serving with the Police Service41G Investigations into matters involving constables of forces other than the Police Service(1) This section applies in relation to an individual who—(a) is a member of—(i) a police force maintained under section 2 of the Police Act 1996,(ii) the metropolitan police force,(iii) the City of London police force, or(iv) the Police Service of Northern Ireland, and(b) is not engaged on temporary service with the Police Service of Scotland in accordance with section 16 of the Police and Fire Reform (Scotland) Act 2012.(2) The Commissioner must, where directed to do so by the appropriate prosecutor, investigate—(a) any circumstances in which there is an indication that the individual may have committed an offence in Scotland whilst acting in the execution of the individual’s duties,(b) on behalf of the relevant procurator fiscal, the circumstances of any death involving the individual whilst acting in the execution of the individual’s duties, which that procurator fiscal is required to investigate under section 1 of the Inquiries into Fatal Accidents and Sudden Deaths etc. (Scotland) Act 2016.(3) Section 41A (investigations under supervision of Lord Advocate or procurator fiscal) applies to an investigation in pursuance of a direction issued under—(a) subsection (2)(a) as it applies to an investigation in pursuance of a direction issued under section 33A(b)(i),(b) subsection (2)(b) as it applies to an investigation in pursuance of a direction issued under section 33A(b)(ii).(4) The Commissioner must, where requested to do so by the appropriate chief constable or officer, investigate and report on a serious incident involving the individual which occurred in Scotland.(5) Subsection (4) is subject to any provision made in regulations under section 41H(1) (investigations under section 41G(4): procedure and reporting).(6) For the purposes of subsection (4)—(1) 
Police (Ethics, Conduct and Scrutiny) (Scotland) Act 2025 asp 5	19Chapter 9A – Advisory list and barred listDocument Generated: 2025-03-04Status: This is the original version (as it was originally enacted). This item of legislation is currently only available in its original format.(a) a serious incident is a circumstance as described in section 41B(1) (serious incidents involving the police) which, instead of involving a person serving with the police, involved the individual acting in the execution of the individual’s duties, other than a matter—(i) which is being investigated by the Commissioner in pursuance of subsection (2)(a) or in respect of which criminal proceedings have been brought following such an investigation by the Commissioner, or(ii) which is being or has been investigated by the Commissioner in pursuance of subsection (2)(b) or by any other person under section 1 of the Inquiries into Fatal Accidents and Sudden Deaths etc. (Scotland) Act 2016,(b) the appropriate chief constable or officer is—(i) the chief constable of the Police Service, where the individual was acting in the course of the duties mentioned in subsection (7)(b),(ii) otherwise, the chief officer or, as the case may be, the chief constable of the police force of which the individual is a member.(7) In this section, a reference to an individual’s duties—(a) is a reference to the individual’s duties as a member of the police force of which the individual is a member,(b) includes a reference to the duties of an individual acting under the direction and control of the chief constable of the Police Service by virtue of section 98 of the Police Act 1996 (cross-border aid of one police force by another).41H Investigations under section 41G(4): procedure and reporting(1) The Scottish Ministers may by regulations make such provision about investigations by the Commissioner in pursuance of section 41G(4) (investigations into matters involving constables of forces other than the Police Service) as they consider appropriate.(2) Regulations may, in particular, make provision—(a) about the circumstances in which the Commissioner—(i) must not or need not carry out an investigation, or(ii) may discontinue an investigation,(b) about the form and procedure of an investigation,(c) imposing restrictions on the extent of any investigation,(d) setting time limits within which matters must be investigated,(e) requiring persons to assist and co-operate with the Commissioner when carrying out an investigation (by providing evidence, attending hearings or otherwise), and(f) for the delegation of functions to the Commissioner.(3) Before making regulations under subsection (1), the Scottish Ministers must consult—(a) the Commissioner,(b) the chief constable,(a) 
20	Police (Ethics, Conduct and Scrutiny) (Scotland) Act 2025 asp 5 Chapter 9A – Advisory list and barred list Document Generated: 2025-03-04Status: This is the original version (as it was originally enacted). This item of legislation is currently only available in its original format.(c) such persons as appear to them to be representative of senior officers,(d) such persons as appear to them to be representative of superintendents (including chief superintendents),(e) the joint central committee of the Police Federation for Scotland,(f) the Secretary of State,(g) the chief constable of the Police Service of Northern Ireland, and(h) such other persons as they think appropriate.(4) The Commissioner must prepare a report of each investigation carried out in pursuance of section 41G(4).(5) The Commissioner must—(a) provide a copy of a report prepared under subsection (4) to—(i) the person who requested the investigation, and(ii) any other person whom the Commissioner considers appropriate, and(b) if the Commissioner considers it appropriate to do so, publish the report in such manner as the Commissioner considers appropriate.(6) A report must not—(a) mention the name of any person, or(b) contain any particulars which, in the Commissioner’s opinion, are likely to identify any person and can be omitted without impairing the effectiveness of the report,unless the Commissioner determines that it is necessary to do so (having taken into account the public interest).”.(3) In section 33A (general functions of the Commissioner)—(a) the word “and” following paragraph (c) is repealed,(b) after paragraph (d), insert—“(e) to carry out investigations in relation to constables of police forces other than the Police Service where directed or requested to do so under section 41G;”.(4) In section 46 (disclosure of information by and to the Commissioner), in subsection (6), after “33A” insert “or section 41G(2)”.(5) In section 46A (protection from actions for defamation), in subsection (1)—(a) in paragraph (a)(i), for “or (d)” substitute “, (d) or (e)”,(b) in paragraph (b), for “or (d)” substitute “, (d) or (e)”.(6) In section 103 (subordinate legislation), in subsection (4)(a), after “41D(1)” insert “or 41H(1)”.18 Review of, and recommendations about, practices and policies of the police(1) The 2006 Act is amended as follows.(2) After section 41H (inserted by section 17(2)), insert—(1) 
Police (Ethics, Conduct and Scrutiny) (Scotland) Act 2025 asp 5	21Chapter 9A – Advisory list and barred listDocument Generated: 2025-03-04Status: This is the original version (as it was originally enacted). This item of legislation is currently only available in its original format.“Review of, and recommendations about, practices and policies of the police41I Review of police practices or policies(1) Where the Commissioner considers that it would be in the public interest to do so, the Commissioner may review a practice or policy of the Authority or the chief constable.(2) Before deciding to carry out a review under subsection (1), the Commissioner must consult His Majesty’s Inspectorate of Constabulary in Scotland.(3) The arrangements mentioned in section 40A(1) (arrangements for handling relevant complaints and investigation of whistleblowing complaints) are not a practice or policy for the purposes of subsection (1).(4) Before carrying out a review under subsection (1), the Commissioner must—(a) inform the person whose practice or policy is to be reviewed,(b) state the practice or policy under review, and(c) provide reasons as to why the review is proposed.(5) The person whose practice or policy is to be reviewed must assist the Commissioner when carrying out a review under subsection (1) (by providing evidence, attending hearings or otherwise).(6) The Commissioner must prepare a report of each review carried out under subsection (1).(7) A report prepared under subsection (6) may include such recommendations as appear to the Commissioner to be necessary or desirable in relation to—(a) the practice or policy to which the review relates, or(b) any other practice of the Authority or the chief constable.(8) The Commissioner must—(a) give a copy of each report prepared under subsection (6) to—(i) the Authority,(ii) the chief constable,(iii) His Majesty’s Inspectorate of Constabulary in Scotland,(iv) the Scottish Ministers, and(v) any other person whom the Commissioner considers appropriate, and(b) publish it in such manner as the Commissioner considers appropriate.(9) But the Commissioner—(a) must withhold from publication any information in the report which would identify an individual (other than the chief constable),(b) may withhold the whole or part of the report from publication if the Commissioner considers that it is in the public interest to do so.(a) 
22	Police (Ethics, Conduct and Scrutiny) (Scotland) Act 2025 asp 5 Chapter 9A – Advisory list and barred list Document Generated: 2025-03-04Status: This is the original version (as it was originally enacted). This item of legislation is currently only available in its original format.41J Recommendations about complaints handling and other matters(1) The Commissioner may make such recommendations, and give such advice, in relation to—(a) the arrangements mentioned in section 40A(1) (arrangements for handling relevant complaints and whistleblowing complaints),(b) the practice of the Authority or the chief constable in relation to other matters,as appear from the carrying out of the Commissioner’s functions (other than those under section 41I (review of police practices or policies)) to be necessary or desirable.(2) A recommendation made, or advice given, under subsection (1) may be—(a) set out in a report prepared by the Commissioner, or(b) made or given in such other manner as the Commissioner considers appropriate.(3) The Commissioner must—(a) give a copy of each report prepared under subsection (2)(a) to—(i) the Authority,(ii) the chief constable,(iii) His Majesty’s Inspectorate of Constabulary in Scotland,(iv) the Scottish Ministers, and(v) any other person whom the Commissioner considers appropriate, and(b) publish it in such manner as the Commissioner considers appropriate.(4) But the Commissioner—(a) must withhold from publication any information in the report which would identify an individual (other than the chief constable),(b) may withhold the whole or part of the report from publication if the Commissioner considers that it is in the public interest to do so.41K Responses to recommendations(1) This section applies where the Commissioner makes a recommendation to the Authority or the chief constable (“the recipient”) in a report prepared under—(a) section 41I(6) (review of police practices and policies), or(b) section 41J(2)(a) (recommendations about complaints handling and other matters).(2) The recipient must give the Commissioner—(a) a written response to the recommendation (the “initial response”), and(b) unless subsection (5) applies, a report on things done during the implementation period by the recipient in response to the recommendation (“the implementation report”).(3) The initial response must set out—(a) details of what the recipient has done or proposes to do in response to the recommendation, or(a) 
Police (Ethics, Conduct and Scrutiny) (Scotland) Act 2025 asp 5	23Chapter 9A – Advisory list and barred listDocument Generated: 2025-03-04Status: This is the original version (as it was originally enacted). This item of legislation is currently only available in its original format.(b) if the recipient has not done, and does not intend to do, anything in response to the recommendation, the reasons for that.(4) The implementation report must set out details of—(a) what the recipient has done in response to the recommendation since receiving the recommendation, and(b) anything else that the recipient proposes to do in response to the recommendation.(5) This subsection applies where the initial response states that the recipient—(a) has already done all of the things that the recipient proposes to do in response to the recommendation, or(b) does not intend to do anything in response to the recommendation.(6) The recipient must give the Commissioner—(a) the initial response within—(i) the period of 8 weeks beginning with the day on which the recipient receives the recommendation, or(ii) such other period as is specified by the Commissioner in the report mentioned in subsection (1),(b) any implementation report as soon as reasonably practicable after the end of the implementation period.(7) The recipient must, as soon as reasonably practicable after it is given to the Commissioner, give a copy of the initial response or implementation report to—(a) the Authority (where the recipient is the chief constable),(b) the chief constable (where the recipient is the Authority),(c) His Majesty’s Inspectorate of Constabulary in Scotland, and(d) the Scottish Ministers.(8) The Commissioner must, as soon as reasonably practicable after receiving the initial response or implementation report, give a copy of it to any person (other than a person mentioned in subsection (7)) to whom the report mentioned in subsection (1) was given.(9) In this section, the “implementation period” means—(a) the period of 12 months beginning with the day on which the recipient receives the recommendation, or(b) such other period as is specified by the Commissioner in the report mentioned in subsection (1).41L Publication of responses to recommendations(1) Subsections (2) and (3) apply where the Authority or the chief constable gives the Commissioner—(a) an initial response under section 41K(2)(a), or(b) an implementation report under section 41K(2)(b).(2) The Commissioner must, as soon as reasonably practicable after receiving the response or report, publish it in such manner as the Commissioner considers appropriate.(2) 
24	Police (Ethics, Conduct and Scrutiny) (Scotland) Act 2025 asp 5 Chapter 9A – Advisory list and barred list Document Generated: 2025-03-04Status: This is the original version (as it was originally enacted). This item of legislation is currently only available in its original format.(3) But the Commissioner—(a) must withhold from publication any information in the response or report which would identify an individual (other than the chief constable),(b) may withhold the whole or part of the response or report from publication if the Commissioner considers that it is in the public interest to do so.(4) If the initial response is not given to the Commissioner by the end of the period mentioned in section 41K(6)(a), the Commissioner must publish notice of that fact.”.(3) In section 33A (general functions of the Commissioner), after paragraph (e) (inserted by section 17(3)), insert “and(f) to carry out reviews and make recommendations in accordance with sections 41I and 41J.”.(4) In section 40A (arrangements for handling relevant complaints), subsection (2) is repealed.(5) In section 43 (reports to the Scottish Ministers), subsections (4) and (6)(b) are repealed.(6) In section 46A (protection from actions for defamation), in subsection (1)—(a) in paragraph (a)—(i) in sub-paragraph (i), after “33A” insert “or a review under section 41I(1)”,(ii) in sub-paragraph (iv), after “section” insert “41J(2)(a) or”,(b) after paragraph (b) (and before the word “and” immediately following that paragraph) insert—“(ba) any statement made to the Commissioner or any of the Commissioner’s staff in relation to a review carried out under section 41I(1) or in a document prepared under section 41K(2) has absolute privilege;”.19 Provision of information to the CommissionerIn section 44 of the 2006 Act (provision of information to the Commissioner), after subsection (5), insert—“(6) The Scottish Ministers may by regulations make provision authorising or requiring the Authority or the chief constable to provide information and documents to the Commissioner in accordance with subsection (1) or (2) by giving the Commissioner, in such circumstances and in accordance with such requirements as may be set out in the regulations, access to an electronic storage system on which they are stored.”.Governance of the Police Investigations and Review Commissioner20 Advisory board to the CommissionerAfter section 46A of the 2006 Act, insert—
Police (Ethics, Conduct and Scrutiny) (Scotland) Act 2025 asp 5	25Chapter 9A – Advisory list and barred listDocument Generated: 2025-03-04Status: This is the original version (as it was originally enacted). This item of legislation is currently only available in its original format.“Advisory board46B Advisory board(1) The Commissioner must establish and maintain an advisory board (“the Board”).(2) The purpose of the Board is to advise the Commissioner about matters relating to the governance and administration of the office of Commissioner.(3) The members of the Board are to be individuals appointed by the Scottish Ministers.(4) A decision to appoint a member to the Board or to terminate a membership of the Board is to be made independently of the Commissioner.(5) The Commissioner may pay to members of the Board such remuneration and allowances (including expenses) as the Commissioner, with the approval of the Scottish Ministers, determines.(6) The procedure of the Board is to be such as the Commissioner determines.”.Final provisions21 Ancillary provision(1) The Scottish Ministers may by regulations make any incidental, supplementary, consequential, transitional, transitory or saving provision they consider appropriate for the purposes of, in connection with or for giving full effect to this Act.(2) Regulations under this section may—(a) make different provision for different purposes,(b) modify any enactment.(3) Regulations under this section—(a) are subject to the affirmative procedure if they add to, replace, or omit any part of the text of an Act,(b) otherwise, are subject to the negative procedure.22 Commencement(1) This section and sections 21 and 23 come into force on the day after Royal Assent.(2) The other provisions of this Act come into force on such day as the Scottish Ministers may by regulations appoint.(3) Regulations under this section may—(a) include transitional, transitory or saving provision,(b) make different provision for different purposes.(a) 
26	Police (Ethics, Conduct and Scrutiny) (Scotland) Act 2025 asp 5 Chapter 9A – Advisory list and barred list Document Generated: 2025-03-04Status: This is the original version (as it was originally enacted). This item of legislation is currently only available in its original format.23 Short titleThe short title of this Act is the Police (Ethics, Conduct and Scrutiny) (Scotland) Act 2025.
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 20112011 CHAPTER 13An Act to make provision about the administration and governance of police forces; about the licensing of, and for the imposition of a late night levy in relation to, the sale and supply of alcohol, and for the repeal of provisions about alcohol disorder zones; for the repeal of sections 132 to 138 of the Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 and for the prohibition of certain activities in Parliament Square; to enable provision in local authority byelaws to include powers of seizure and forfeiture; about the control of dangerous or otherwise harmful drugs; to restrict the issue of arrest warrants for certain extra-territorial offences; and for connected purposes.	[15th September 2011]BE IT ENACTED by the Queen's most Excellent Majesty, by and with the advice and consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons, in this present Parliament assembled, and by the authority of the same, as follows:—
2	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)Part 1 – Police reformCHAPTER 1 – Police areas outside London Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)PART 1POLICE REFORMCHAPTER 1POLICE AREAS OUTSIDE LONDON1 Police and crime commissioners(1) There is to be a police and crime commissioner for each police area listed in Schedule 1 to the Police Act 1996 (police areas outside London).(2) A police and crime commissioner is a corporation sole.(3) [F1Unless subsection (3B) applies, the] name of the police and crime commissioner for a police area is “the Police and Crime Commissioner for” with the addition of the name of the police area.[F2(3A) Subsection (3B) applies if the person who is the police and crime commissioner for a police area is also the fire and rescue authority for the area which corresponds to, or an area which falls within, the police area.(3B) In that case the name of the police and crime commissioner is “the Police, Fire and Crime Commissioner for” with the addition of the name of the police area.](4) The police and crime commissioner for a police area is to be elected, and hold office, in accordance with Chapter 6.(5) A police and crime commissioner has—(a) the functions conferred by this section,(b) the functions relating to community safety and crime prevention conferred by Chapter 3, and(c) the other functions conferred by this Act and other enactments.(6) The police and crime commissioner for a police area must—(a) secure the maintenance of the police force for that area, and(b) secure that the police force is efficient and effective.(7) The police and crime commissioner for a police area must hold the relevant chief constable to account for the exercise of—(a) the functions of the chief constable, and(b) the functions of persons under the direction and control of the chief constable.(8) The police and crime commissioner must, in particular, hold the chief constable to account for—(1) 
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)	3Part 1 – Police reformCHAPTER 1 – Police areas outside London Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)(a) the exercise of the duty under section 8(2) (duty to have regard to police and crime plan);(b) the exercise of the duty under section 37A(2) of the Police Act 1996 (duty to have regard to strategic policing requirement);(c) the exercise of the duty under section 39A(7) of the Police Act 1996 (duty to have regard to codes of practice issued by Secretary of State);[F3(ca)	the exercise of the chief constable’s functions under Part 2 of the Police Reform Act 2002 in relation to the handling of complaints;](d) the effectiveness and efficiency of the chief constable's arrangements for co- operating with other persons in the exercise of the chief constable's functions (whether under section 22A of the Police Act 1996 or otherwise);(e) the effectiveness and efficiency of the chief constable's arrangements under section 34 (engagement with local people);(f) the extent to which the chief constable has complied with section 35 (value for money);(g) the exercise of duties relating to equality and diversity that are imposed on the chief constable by any enactment;(h) the exercise of duties in relation to the safeguarding of children and the promotion of child welfare that are imposed on the chief constable by sections 10 and 11 of the Children Act 2004.(9) The police authorities established for police areas under section 3 of the Police Act 1996 are abolished.[F4(9A) Subsection (1) does not apply to an area in relation to which an order under section 107F(1) of the Local Democracy, Economic Development and Construction Act 2009 has effect (order providing for mayor for an area of a combined authority to exercise functions of a police and crime commissioner for the area).](10) Schedule 1 (police and crime commissioners) has effect.
4	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)Part 1 – Police reformCHAPTER 2 – Metropolitan police district Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)2 Chief constables(1) Each police force is to have a chief constable.(2) The chief constable of a police force is to be appointed, and hold office, in accordance with—(a) section 38, and(b) the terms and conditions of the appointment.(3) A police force, and the civilian staff of a police force, are under the direction and control of the chief constable of the force.(4) A chief constable has the other functions conferred by this Act and by other enactments.(5) A chief constable must exercise the power of direction and control conferred by subsection (3) in such a way as is reasonable to assist the relevant police and crime commissioner to exercise the commissioner's functions.(6) Subsection (3) is subject to any provision included in a collaboration agreement (see section 22A of the Police Act 1996).(7) Schedule 2 (chief constables) has effect.(8) In this section “police force” means the police force for a police area listed in Schedule 1 to the Police Act 1996 (see section 2 of that Act).CHAPTER 2METROPOLITAN POLICE DISTRICT3 Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime(1) There is to be a body with the name “The Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime” for the metropolitan police district.(2) The Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime is a corporation sole.(3) The person who is Mayor of London for the time being is to be the occupant for the time being of the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime.(4) Accordingly, where a person is the occupant of the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime by virtue of a particular term of office as Mayor of London (the “relevant mayoral term”), the person's term as the occupant of the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime—(a) begins at the same time as the relevant mayoral term, and(b) ends at the same time as the relevant mayoral term.(5) The Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime has—(a) the functions conferred by this section,(a) 
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)	5Part 1 – Police reformCHAPTER 2 – Metropolitan police district Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)(b) the functions relating to community safety and crime prevention conferred by Chapter 3, and(c) the other functions conferred by this Act and other enactments.(6) The Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime must—(a) secure the maintenance of the metropolitan police force, and(b) secure that the metropolitan police force is efficient and effective.(7) The Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime must hold the Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis to account for the exercise of—(a) the functions of the Commissioner, and(b) the functions of persons under the direction and control of the Commissioner.(8) The Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime must, in particular, hold the Commissioner to account for—(a) the exercise of the duty imposed by section 8(4) (duty to have regard to police and crime plan);(b) the exercise of the duty under section 37A(2) of the Police Act 1996 (duty to have regard to strategic policing requirement);(c) the exercise of the duty imposed by section 39A(7) of the Police Act 1996 (duty to have regard to codes of practice issued by Secretary of State);[F5(ca)	the exercise of the Commissioner’s functions under Part 2 of the Police Reform Act 2002 in relation to the handling of complaints;](d) the effectiveness and efficiency of the Commissioner's arrangements for co- operating with other persons in the exercise of the Commissioner's functions (whether under section 22A of the Police Act 1996 or otherwise);(e) the effectiveness and efficiency of the Commissioner's arrangements under section 34 (engagement with local people);(f) the extent to which the Commissioner has complied with section 35 (value for money);(g) the exercise of duties relating to equality and diversity imposed on the Commissioner by any enactment;(h) the exercise of duties in relation to the safeguarding of children and the promotion of child welfare that are imposed on the Commissioner by sections 10 and 11 of the Children Act 2004.(9) In section 424 of the Greater London Authority Act 1999 (interpretation), in subsection (1), in the definition of “functional body”, for paragraph (c) substitute—“(c)	the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime; or”.(10) In this section, references to the Mayor of London include references to a person who is, by virtue of Schedule 4 to the Greater London Authority Act 1999 (exercise of functions of Mayor during vacancy or incapacity), treated as if the person were the Mayor of London.(11) Where such a person is the occupant for the time being of the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime, references in this section to the relevant mayoral term are references to the period for which the person is treated as if the person were the Mayor of London.(12) The Metropolitan Police Authority is abolished.(13) Schedule 3 (Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime) has effect.(1) 
6	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)Part 1 – Police reformCHAPTER 3 – Functions of elected local policing bodies etcDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)4 Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis(1) There is to be a corporation sole with the name “the Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis”.(2) The Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis is to be appointed, and hold office, in accordance with—(a) sections 42 and 48, and(b) the terms and conditions of the appointment.(3) The metropolitan police force, and the civilian staff of the metropolitan police force, are under the direction and control of the Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis.(4) The Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis has the other functions conferred by this Act and by other enactments.(5) The Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis must exercise the power of direction and control conferred by subsection (3) in such a way as is reasonable to assist the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime to exercise that Office's functions.(6) Subsection (3) is subject to any provision included in a collaboration agreement (see section 22A of the Police Act 1996).(7) Schedule 4 (Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis) has effect.CHAPTER 3FUNCTIONS OF ELECTED LOCAL POLICING BODIES ETCCommunity safety and crime prevention5 Police and crime commissioners to issue police and crime plans(1) The police and crime commissioner for a police area must issue a police and crime plan within the financial year in which each ordinary election is held.(2) A police and crime commissioner must comply with the duty under subsection (1) as soon as practicable after the commissioner takes office.(1) 
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)	7Part 1 – Police reformCHAPTER 3 – Functions of elected local policing bodies etc Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)(3) A police and crime commissioner may, at any time, issue a police and crime plan.(4) A police and crime commissioner may vary a police and crime plan.(5) In issuing or varying a police and crime plan, a police and crime commissioner must have regard to the strategic policing requirement issued by the Secretary of State under section 37A of the Police Act 1996.[F6(5A) Subsections (5B) to (5E) apply to a police and crime commissioner for a police area—(a) which corresponds to the area of a fire and rescue authority created by an order under section 4A, or(b) within which the area of such a fire and rescue authority falls.(5B) Subject to subsection (5E), in issuing or varying a police and crime plan, the police and crime commissioner must have regard to—(a) the current Fire and Rescue National Framework prepared under section 21 of the Fire and Rescue Services Act 2004, and(b) the last document prepared and published by the fire and rescue authority in accordance with that Framework which sets out the authority’s priorities and objectives, for the period covered by the document, in connection with the discharge of the authority’s functions.(5C) A police and crime plan which the police and crime commissioner is required to prepare may be prepared jointly by the commissioner and the fire and rescue authority.(5D) If the police and crime commissioner and the fire and rescue authority prepare a joint police and crime plan, the plan must also set out the fire and rescue authority’s priorities and objectives, for the period of the plan, in connection with the discharge of the authority’s functions.(5E) Subsection (5B)(b) does not apply to a joint police and crime plan.](6) Before issuing or varying a police and crime plan, a police and crime commissioner must—(a) prepare a draft of the plan or variation,(b) consult the relevant chief constable in preparing the draft plan or variation,(c) send the draft plan or variation to the relevant police and crime panel,(d) have regard to any report or recommendations made by the panel in relation to the draft plan or variation (see section 28(3)),(e) give the panel a response to any such report or recommendations, and(f) publish any such response.(7) In complying with subsection (6)(c), the police and crime commissioner must ensure that the relevant police and crime panel has a reasonable amount of time to exercise its functions under section 28(3).(8) A police and crime commissioner must consult the relevant chief constable before issuing or varying a police and crime plan if, and to the extent that, the plan or variation is different from the draft prepared in accordance with subsection (6).(9) A police and crime commissioner must—(a) keep the police and crime plan under review, and(b) in particular, review the police and crime plan in the light of—(a) 
8	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)Part 1 – Police reformCHAPTER 3 – Functions of elected local policing bodies etcDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)(i) any report or recommendations made to the commissioner by the relevant police and crime panel under section 28(4), and(ii) any changes in the strategic policing requirement issued by the Secretary of State under section 37A of the Police Act 1996;and exercise the powers under subsection (3) or (4) accordingly.(10) A police and crime commissioner who issues or varies a police and crime plan must—(a) send a copy of the issued plan, or the variation, to the relevant chief constable and to each of the other persons and bodies that are, for the purposes of section 5 of the Crime and Disorder Act 1998, responsible authorities in relation to local government areas that are wholly or partly within the relevant police area, and(b) publish a copy of the issued plan, or the variation.(11) The duty under subsection (10) to send or publish a copy of the variation may instead be satisfied by sending or publishing a copy of the plan as varied.(12) It is for the commissioner to determine the manner in which—(a) a response to a report or recommendations is to be published in accordance with subsection (6)(f), and(b) a copy of the plan or variation is to be published in accordance with subsection (10) (b).(13) In this section—  “financial year” means the financial year of the police and crime commissioner;  “ordinary election”, in relation to the police and crime commissioner for a police area, means an election held under section 50 in relation to that area.
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)	9Part 1 – Police reformCHAPTER 3 – Functions of elected local policing bodies etc Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)6 Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime to issue police and crime plans(1) The Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime must issue a police and crime plan within the financial year in which each ordinary election is held.(2) The Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime must comply with the duty under subsection (1) as soon as practicable after the person elected in the ordinary election takes office.(3) The Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime may, at any time, issue a police and crime plan.(4) The Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime may vary a police and crime plan.(5) In issuing or varying a police and crime plan, the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime must have regard to the strategic policing requirement issued by the Secretary of State under section 37A of the Police Act 1996.(6) Before issuing or varying a police and crime plan, the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime must—(a) prepare a draft of the plan or variation,(b) consult the Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis in preparing the draft plan or variation,(c) send the draft plan or variation to the police and crime panel of the London Assembly (see section 32),(d) have regard to any report or recommendations made by the panel in relation to the draft plan or variation (see section 33(1)),(e) give the panel a response to any such report or recommendations, and(f) publish any such response.(7) In complying with subsection (6)(c), the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime must ensure that the police and crime panel has a reasonable amount of time to exercise its functions under section 33(1).(8) The Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime must consult the Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis before issuing or varying a police and crime plan if, and to the extent that, the plan or variation is different from the draft prepared in accordance with subsection (6).(9) The Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime must—(a) keep the police and crime plan under review, and(b) in particular, review the police and crime plan in the light of any changes in the strategic policing requirement issued by the Secretary of State under section 37A of the Police Act 1996;and exercise the powers under subsection (3) or (4) accordingly.(10) The provisions of the 1999 Act set out in subsection (11) apply to the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime and police and crime plans as the provisions apply to the Mayor of London and the relevant mayoral strategies.(11) Those provisions of the 1999 Act are—(a) section 33(1)(b) and (c) (equality of opportunity);(b) section 41(4)(b) and (c), (5), (6)(a) and (b), (7) to (8A), and (10) to (12) (general duties in preparing and revising strategies);(a) 
10	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)Part 1 – Police reformCHAPTER 3 – Functions of elected local policing bodies etcDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)(c) section 42(1) and (6) (consultation);(d) section 42A (apart from subsection (2)) (consultation: supplementary provision);(e) section 43 (publicity and availability of strategies);(f) section 44 (directions by the Secretary of State).(12) Section 41(5)(b) of the 1999 Act has effect in relation to the Mayor of London as if the police and crime plan were a strategy listed in section 41(1) of the 1999 Act.(13) The Mayor of London and the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime must co-operate with each other in exercising their respective functions under section 41(5)(b) of the 1999 Act.(14) In its application by virtue of subsection (11)(e), section 43(2) of the 1999 Act (duty to send copies of current version of police and crime plan) has effect with the insertion after “to each London borough council” of the words “and to each of the other persons and bodies that are, for the purposes of section 5 of the Crime and Disorder Act 1998, responsible authorities in relation to local government areas that are wholly or partly within the metropolitan police district”.(15) In this section—“1999 Act” means the Greater London Authority Act 1999;  “financial year” means the financial year of the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime;  “ordinary election” means an election of the Mayor of London held under section 3 of the 1999 Act;  “relevant mayoral strategy”, in relation to a provision set out in subsection (11), means a strategy to which the provision applies.7 Police and crime plans(1) A police and crime plan is a plan which sets out, in relation to the planning period, the following matters—(a) the elected local policing body's police and crime objectives;(b) the policing of the police area which the chief officer of police is to provide;(c) the financial and other resources which the elected local policing body is to provide to the chief officer of police for the chief officer to exercise the functions of chief officer;(d) the means by which the chief officer of police will report to the elected local policing body on the chief officer's provision of policing;(e) the means by which the chief officer of police's performance in providing policing will be measured;[F7(ea) the services which are to be provided by virtue of section 143 of the Anti- social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014;(f) any grants which the elected local policing body is to make under that section, and the conditions (if any) subject to which any such grants are to be made.](a) 
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)	11Part 1 – Police reformCHAPTER 3 – Functions of elected local policing bodies etc Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)(2) The elected local policing body's police and crime objectives are the body's objectives for—(a) the policing of the body's area,(b) crime and disorder reduction in that area, and(c) the discharge by the relevant police force of its national or international functions.(3) A police and crime plan has effect from the start of the planning period until—(a) the end of that planning period, or(b) if another police and crime plan is issued in relation to the elected local policing body's area before the end of that planning period, the day when that other plan first has effect.(4) The Secretary of State may give guidance to elected local policing bodies about the matters to be dealt with in police and crime plans.(5) An elected local policing body must have regard to such guidance.(6) Before giving guidance under subsection (4) the Secretary of State must consult—(a) such persons as appear to the Secretary of State to represent the views of police and crime commissioners,(b) the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime,(c) such persons as appear to the Secretary of State to represent the views of chief officers of police, and(d) such other persons as the Secretary of State thinks fit.(7) In this section, in relation to a police and crime plan—“financial year” means the financial year of the elected local policing body; “ordinary election”—(a) in relation to a police and crime commissioner, has the meaning given in section 5;(b) in relation to the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime, has the meaning given in section 6;“planning period”, in relation to a police and crime plan, is the period that—(a) begins with—(i) the day on which the plan is issued, or(ii) if a qualifying day is specified in the plan as the day on which the plan is to begin to have effect, that day, and(b) ends with the last day of the financial year in which the next ordinary election is expected to take place after the plan is issued;  “qualifying day” means a day which meets the following conditions (so far as applicable)—(a) the day must fall after the day on which the plan is issued;(b) the day must not fall after the day on which the next ordinary election is expected to take place after the plan is issued;(c) in the case of a plan issued in accordance with the duty in section 5(1) or 6(1), the day must be, or fall before, the first day of the financial year following the financial year in which that duty must be complied with.(a) 
12	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)Part 1 – Police reformCHAPTER 3 – Functions of elected local policing bodies etcDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)8 Duty to have regard to police and crime plan(1) A police and crime commissioner must, in exercising the functions of commissioner, have regard to the police and crime plan issued by the commissioner.(2) The chief constable of the police force for a police area listed in Schedule 1 to the Police Act 1996 must, in exercising the functions of chief constable, have regard to the police and crime plan issued by the police and crime commissioner for that police area.(3) The Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime must, in exercising the functions of the Office, have regard to the police and crime plan issued by the Office.(4) The Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis must, in exercising the functions of Commissioner, have regard to the police and crime plan issued by the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime.(5) The Secretary of State may give guidance to a person subject to a duty under this section about how that duty is to be complied with.(6) A person given such guidance must have regard to the guidance.(7) Before giving guidance under subsection (5) the Secretary of State must consult—(a) such persons as appear to the Secretary of State to represent the views of police and crime commissioners,(b) the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime,(c) such persons as appear to the Secretary of State to represent the views of chief officers of police, and(d) such other persons as the Secretary of State thinks fit.
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)	13Part 1 – Police reformCHAPTER 3 – Functions of elected local policing bodies etc Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)F89	Crime and disorder reduction grants. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .10 Co-operative working(1) The elected local policing body for a police area must, in exercising its functions, have regard to the relevant priorities of each responsible authority.(2) The elected local policing body for a police area, in exercising its functions, and a responsible authority, in exercising its functions conferred by or under section 6 of the Crime and Disorder Act 1998 in relation to that police area, must act in co-operation with each other.(3) The elected local policing body for a police area, and the criminal justice bodies which exercise functions as criminal justice bodies in that police area, must make arrangements (so far as it is appropriate to do so) for the exercise of functions so as to provide an efficient and effective criminal justice system for the police area.(4) The references in this section to a responsible authority exercising functions in relation to a police area are references to the responsible authority exercising the functions in relation to a local government area that is comprised, or included, in the police area.(5) In this section—  “criminal justice body”, in relation to the elected local policing body for a police area, means—(a) the chief officer of police for that police area;(b) the Crown Prosecution Service;(c) the Lord Chancellor, in exercising functions under section 1 of the Courts Act 2003 (duty to ensure efficient and effective courts service);(d) a Minister of the Crown, in exercising functions in relation to prisons (within the meaning of the Prison Act 1952);(e) a youth offending team established under section 39 of the Crime and Disorder Act 1998;(f) a person with whom the Secretary of State has made contractual or other arrangements, under section 3(2) of the Offender Management Act 2007, for the making of probation provision;(g) the Secretary of State, in making probation provision in accordance with arrangements made by the Secretary of State under section 3(5) of the Offender Management Act 2007;  “functions” does not include functions which are exercisable only in relation to Wales and relate to matters in relation to which the Welsh Ministers have functions;  
14	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)Part 1 – Police reformCHAPTER 3 – Functions of elected local policing bodies etcDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)  “Minister of the Crown” has the same meaning as in the Ministers of the Crown Act 1975;  “relevant priority”, in relation to a responsible authority, means a priority applicable to the exercise of that authority's functions which is identified by that authority in compliance with a requirement imposed by regulations made under section 6(2) of the Crime and Disorder Act 1998;  “responsible authority” has the same meaning as in section 5 of the Crime and Disorder Act 1998.Information, consultation etc11 Information for public etc(1) An elected local policing body—(a) must publish specified information; and(b) if the time or manner of the publication of that information is specified, must publish it at that time or in that manner.(2) For that purpose, “specified” means specified by the Secretary of State by order.(3) An elected local policing body must publish the information which the body considers to be necessary to enable the persons who live in the body's area to assess—(a) the performance of the body in exercising the body's functions, and(b) the performance of the relevant chief officer of police in exercising the chief officer's functions.(4) The information necessary to enable those persons to assess those matters by reference to a particular time, or a particular period, must be published by the elected local policing body as soon as practicable after that time or the end of that period.(5) An elected local policing body may provide (whether by publication or other means) information about—(a) the exercise of the body's functions, and(b) the exercise of the functions of the relevant chief officer of police.
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)	15Part 1 – Police reformCHAPTER 3 – Functions of elected local policing bodies etc Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)12 Annual reports(1) Each elected local policing body must produce a report (an “annual report”) on—(a) the exercise of the body's functions in each financial year, and(b) the progress which has been made in the financial year in meeting the police and crime objectives in the body's police and crime plan.(2) As soon as practicable after producing an annual report, the elected local policing body must send the report to the relevant police and crime panel.(3) The elected local policing body must attend before the panel at the public meeting arranged by the panel in accordance with section 28(4), to—(a) present the report to the panel, and(b) answer the panel's questions on the report.(4) The elected local policing body must—(a) give the panel a response to any report or recommendations on the annual report (see section 28(4)), and(b) publish any such response.(5) It is for the police and crime panel to determine the manner in which a response to a report or recommendations is to be published in accordance with subsection (4)(b).(6) An elected local policing body must arrange for each annual report to be published.(7) It is for the elected local policing body to determine the manner in which an annual report is to be published.13 Information for police and crime panels(1) An elected local policing body must provide the relevant police and crime panel with any information which the panel may reasonably require in order to carry out its functions.(2) But subsection (1) does not require the elected local policing body to provide information if disclosure of the information—(a) would, in the view of the chief officer of police, be against the interests of national security,(a) 
16	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)Part 1 – Police reformCHAPTER 3 – Functions of elected local policing bodies etcDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)(b) might, in the view of the chief officer of police, jeopardise the safety of any person,(c) might, in the view of the chief officer of police, prejudice the prevention or detection of crime, the apprehension or prosecution of offenders, or the administration of justice, or(d) is prohibited by or under any enactment.(3) An elected local policing body may provide the relevant police and crime panel with any other information which the body thinks appropriate.14 Arrangements for obtaining the views of the community on policing(1) Section 96 of the Police Act 1996 (arrangements for obtaining the views of the community on policing) is amended in accordance with this section.(2) In subsection (1), after paragraph (b) insert “;and for obtaining the views of victims of crime in that area about matters concerning the policing of the area.”.(3) After subsection (1) insert—“(1A) Those arrangements must include, in the case of—(a) a police area listed in Schedule 1, or(b) the metropolitan police district,arrangements for obtaining, before a police and crime plan is issued under section 5 or 6 of the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011, the views of the people in that police area, and the views of the victims of crime in that area, on that plan.(1B) Those arrangements must include, in the case of a police area listed in Schedule 1, arrangements for obtaining, before the first precept for a financial year is issued by the police and crime commissioner under section 40 of the Local Government Finance Act 1992, the views of—(a) the people in that police area, and(b) the relevant ratepayers' representatives,on the proposals of the police and crime commissioner for expenditure (including capital expenditure) in that financial year.
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)	17Part 1 – Police reformCHAPTER 3 – Functions of elected local policing bodies etc Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)(1C) Those arrangements must include, in the case of the metropolitan police district, arrangements for obtaining, before the first calculations in relation to the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime are made for a financial year under section 85 of the Greater London Authority Act 1999, the views of—(a) the people in the metropolitan police district, and(b) the relevant ratepayers' representatives,on the proposals of the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime for expenditure (including capital expenditure) in that financial year.”.(4) For subsection (2) substitute—“(2) Arrangements under this section are to be made by the local policing body for the police area, after consulting the chief officer of police for that area.”.(5) Before subsection (6) insert—“(5A) In subsections (1B) and (1C) “relevant ratepayers' representatives”, in relation to a police area listed in Schedule 1, or the metropolitan police district, means the persons or bodies who appear to the elected local policing body for that area or district to be representative of persons subject to non-domestic rates under sections 43 and 45 of the Local Government Finance Act 1988 as regards hereditaments situated in that area or district.(5B) In determining which persons or bodies are relevant ratepayers' representatives, an elected local policing body must have regard to any guidance given by the Secretary of State.”.(6) Omit subsections (6) to (10).Other provisions about functions15 Supply of goods and services(1) Subsections (1), (2) and (3) of section 1 of the 1970 Act (supply of goods and services by local authorities) apply, with the modification set out in subsection (2), to each elected local policing body as they apply to a local authority.(2) In those subsections, references to a public body (within the meaning of that section) are to be read as references to any person.(3) An elected local policing body may not enter into an agreement with another elected local policing body, or with the Common Council of the City of London in its capacity as a police authority, under section 1 of the 1970 Act in respect of a matter which could be the subject of force collaboration provision in a collaboration agreement under section 22A of the Police Act 1996.(4) In this section “1970 Act” means the Local Authorities (Goods and Services) Act 1970.(2) 
18 Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)Part 1 – Police reformCHAPTER 3 – Functions of elected local policing bodies etcDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)16 Appointment of persons not employed by elected local policing bodies(1) This section applies where an elected local policing body is required or authorised by any Act—(a) to appoint a person to a specified post in the body, or(b) to designate a person as having specified duties or responsibilities.(2) The elected local policing body may appoint or designate a person whether or not the person is already a member of staff of the body.(3) Subsection (2) has effect in spite of any provision to the contrary in the Act that is mentioned in subsection (1).17 Duties when carrying out functions(1) In carrying out functions, an elected local policing body must have regard to the views of people in the body's area about policing in that area.(2) In carrying out functions in a particular financial year, an elected local policing body must have regard to any report or recommendations made by the relevant police and crime panel on the annual report for the previous financial year (see section 28(4)).(3) Subsection (2) does not affect any exercise of the functions of the elected local policing body in any part of a particular financial year that falls—(a) before the body has received a report or recommendations on the annual report for the previous financial year, or(b) during the period after receipt of a report or recommendations when the body is considering the report or recommendations.(4) In carrying out functions, an elected local policing body must have regard to any financial code of practice issued by the Secretary of State.(5) The Secretary of State may from time to time revise the whole or any part of any financial code of practice.(1) 
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)	19Part 1 – Police reformCHAPTER 3 – Functions of elected local policing bodies etc Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)(6) The Secretary of State must lay before Parliament a copy of—(a) any financial code of practice, and(b) any revision of a financial code of practice.(7) In this section “financial code of practice” means a code of practice relating to the proper administration by elected local policing bodies of their financial affairs.(8) This section is in addition to the duty under section 8 to have regard to the police and crime plan.I28 I29 I30S. 17 in force at 16.1.2012 for specified purposes by S.I. 2011/3019, art. 3, Sch. 1S. 17 in force at 22.11.2012 in so far as not already in force by S.I. 2012/2892, art. 2(a)S. 17(4)-(7) in force at 15.12.2011 for specified purposes by S.I. 2011/3019, art. 2(b)18Delegation of functions by police and crime commissioners(1) The police and crime commissioner for a police area may—(a) appoint a person as the deputy police and crime commissioner for that police area, and(b) arrange for the deputy police and crime commissioner to exercise any function of the police and crime commissioner.(2) A police and crime commissioner may arrange for any person (who is not the deputy police and crime commissioner) to exercise any function of the commissioner.(3) But a police and crime commissioner may not—(a) appoint a person listed in subsection (6) as the deputy police and crime commissioner;[F9(aa)	arrange, under subsection (1)(b) or (2), for the Deputy Mayor for Policing and Crime or any other person to exercise a function that the Mayor’s Office for
20	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)Part 1 – Police reformCHAPTER 3 – Functions of elected local policing bodies etcDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)Policing and Crime has under or by virtue of Part 2 of the Police Reform Act 2002 (see instead section 23(2)(pa) of that Act and regulations made under that provision);](b) arrange for the deputy police and crime commissioner to exercise a function listed in subsection (7)(a), (e) or (f);(c) arrange, under subsection (2), for a person listed in subsection (6) to exercise any function; or(d) arrange, under subsection (2), for any person to exercise a function listed in subsection (7).(4) A deputy police and crime commissioner may arrange for any other person to exercise any function of the police and crime commissioner which is, in accordance with subsection (1)(b), exercisable by the deputy police and crime commissioner.(5) But the deputy police and crime commissioner may not arrange for a person to exercise a function if—(a) the person is listed in subsection (6), or(b) the function is listed in subsection (7).(6) The persons referred to in subsections (3)(a) and (c) and (5) are—(a) a constable (whether or not in England and Wales);(b) a police and crime commissioner;(c) the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime;(d) the Deputy Mayor for Policing and Crime appointed by the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime;(e) the Mayor of London;(f) the Common Council of the City of London;(g) any other person or body which maintains a police force;(h) a member of the staff of a person falling within any of paragraphs (a) to (g).(7) The functions referred to in subsection (3) are—(a) issuing a police and crime plan (see section 5);(b) determining police and crime objectives (see section 7);(c) attendance at a meeting of a police and crime panel in compliance with a requirement by the panel to do so (see section 29);(d) preparing an annual report to a policing and crime panel (see section 12);(e) appointing the chief constable, suspending the chief constable, or calling upon the chief constable to retire or resign (see section 38);(f) calculating a [F10council tax requirement or a] budget requirement (see section[F1142A or] 43 of the Local Government Finance Act 1992).[F12(g)	appointing a local auditor under section 7 of the Local Audit and Accountability Act 2014;(h)	deciding whether to enter into a liability limitation agreement under section 14 of that Act.](8) If a function of a police and crime commissioner is exercisable by any other person in accordance with this section, any property or rights vested in the commissioner may be dealt with by the other person in exercising the function, as if vested in that person.(9) Subsection (2) applies whether or not there is a deputy police and crime commissioner.(1) 
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)	21Part 1 – Police reformCHAPTER 3 – Functions of elected local policing bodies etc Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)(10) The deputy police and crime commissioner is a member of the police and crime commissioner's staff.(11) For further provision about the appointment of a deputy police and crime commissioner, see paragraphs 8 to 12 of Schedule 1.19 Delegation of functions by Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime(1) The Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime may—(a) appoint a person as the Deputy Mayor for Policing and Crime, and(b) arrange for the Deputy Mayor for Policing and Crime to exercise any function of the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime.(2) The Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime may arrange for a person (who is not the Deputy Mayor for Policing and Crime) to exercise any function of the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime.(3) But the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime may not—(a) appoint a person listed in subsection (6) as the Deputy Mayor for Policing and Crime;[F13(aa)  arrange, under subsection (1)(b) or (2), for the Deputy Mayor for Policing and Crime or any other person to exercise a function that the Mayor’s Office for Policing and Crime has under or by virtue of Part 2 of the Police Reform Act 2002 (see instead section 23(2)(pa) of that Act and regulations made under that provision);](b) arrange for the Deputy Mayor for Policing and Crime to exercise a function listed in subsection (7) (a), (e), (f), (g) or (h);(c) arrange, under subsection (2), for a person listed in subsection (6) to exercise any function; or(a) 
22	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)Part 1 – Police reformCHAPTER 3 – Functions of elected local policing bodies etcDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)(d) arrange, under subsection (2), for a person to exercise a function listed in subsection (7).(4) The Deputy Mayor for Policing and Crime may arrange for any other person to exercise any function of the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime which is, in accordance with subsection (1)(b), exercisable by the Deputy Mayor for Policing and Crime.(5) But the Deputy Mayor for Policing and Crime may not arrange for a person to exercise a function if—(a) the person is listed in subsection (6), or(b) the function is listed in subsection (7).(6) The persons referred to in subsections (3)(a) and (c) and (5) are—(a) a constable (whether or not in England and Wales);(b) a police and crime commissioner;(c) the Mayor of London;(d) the Common Council of the City of London;(e) any other person or body which maintains a police force;(f) a member of the staff of a person falling within any of paragraphs (a) to (e).(7) The functions mentioned in subsection (3) are—(a) issuing a police and crime plan (see section 6);(b) determining police and crime objectives (see section 7);(c) attendance at a meeting of the police and crime panel of the London Assembly in compliance with a requirement by the panel to do so (see section 29);(d) preparing an annual report to the policing and crime panel of the London Assembly (see section 12);(e) making recommendations in relation to the appointment of a Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis under section 42;(f) making representations in relation to the appointment of a Deputy Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis under section 45;(g) being consulted in relation to the appointment or removal of an Assistant Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis, a Deputy Assistant Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis, or a Commander (see sections 45, 46, 47 and 49);(h) suspending the Commissioner, or Deputy Commissioner, of Police of the Metropolis, or calling upon the Commissioner, or Deputy Commissioner, to retire or resign (see section 48);[F14(i) appointing a local auditor under section 7 of the Local Audit and Accountability Act 2014;(j)  deciding whether to enter into a liability limitation agreement under section 14 of that Act.](8) If a function of the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime is exercisable by a person in accordance with subsection (1), (2) or (4), any property or rights vested in the Office may be dealt with by the other person in exercising the function, as if vested in that person.(9) Subsection (2) applies whether or not there is a Deputy Mayor for Policing and Crime.(10) The Deputy Mayor for Policing and Crime is a member of the staff of the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime.(1) 
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)	23Part 1 – Police reformCHAPTER 3 – Functions of elected local policing bodies etc Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)(11) But that is subject to paragraph 4(4) of Schedule 3 (Deputy Mayor an Assembly member).(12) The appointment of the Deputy Mayor for Policing and Crime is subject to Schedule 4A to the Greater London Authority Act 1999.(13) For further provision about the appointment of the Deputy Mayor for Policing and Crime, see paragraph 4 of Schedule 3.20 Deputy Mayor for Policing and Crime: confirmation hearings(1) The Greater London Authority Act 1999 is amended in accordance with this section.(2) In section 60A (confirmation hearings etc for certain appointments by the Mayor)—(a) in the title, at the end insert “ or Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime ”;(b) in subsection (3), omit the entry relating to the chairman and vice chairman of the Metropolitan Police Authority;(c) for subsection (4) substitute—“(4) This section also applies in any case where the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime proposes to make an appointment, under section 19 of the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011, of a person to be the Deputy Mayor for Policing and Crime.”.(3) In Schedule 4A (confirmation hearings etc)—(a) in paragraph 1 (application of Schedule), after sub-paragraph (2) insert—“(3) This Schedule also has effect where the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime proposes to make an appointment, under section 19 of the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011, of a person to be the Deputy Mayor for Policing and Crime.(4) In the application of this Schedule in relation to such an appointment, references to the Mayor are to be read as references to the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime.(5) Paragraph 9 does not apply in relation to such an appointment (but see section 32 of the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011).(6) Paragraph 10 applies in relation to such an appointment if the candidate is not a member of the London Assembly.(7) Paragraphs 2, 4 and 5 are subject to paragraph 10.”;(1) 
24	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)Part 1 – Police reformCHAPTER 3 – Functions of elected local policing bodies etcDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)(b) after paragraph 9 insert—“10 (1) The London Assembly may veto the appointment of the candidate as Deputy Mayor for Policing and Crime if the candidate is not a member of the London Assembly.(2) The exercise of that power of veto in relation to an appointment is not valid unless the London Assembly—(a) has held a confirmation meeting in relation to the appointment before the exercise of the power; and(b) notifies the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime of the veto within the period of 3 weeks described in paragraph 4(3).(3) If the London Assembly vetoes the appointment of the candidate, the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime must not appoint the candidate.(4) References in this Schedule to the London Assembly vetoing the appointment of a candidate are references to the Assembly making a decision, by the required majority, that the candidate should not be appointed as Deputy Mayor for Policing and Crime.(5) For that purpose, the London Assembly makes that decision by the required majority if at least two-thirds of the votes given in making that decision are votes in favour of making that decision.”Financial matters21 Police fund(1) Each elected local policing body must keep a fund to be known as the police fund.(2) All of an elected local policing body's receipts must be paid into the relevant police fund.(3) All of an elected local policing body's expenditure must be paid out of the relevant police fund.(4) An elected local policing body must keep accounts of payments made into or out of the relevant police fund.(5) Subsections (2) and (3) are subject to any regulations under the Police Pensions Act 1976.(6) In this section “relevant police fund”, in relation to an elected local policing body, means the police fund which that body keeps.(1) 
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)	25Part 1 – Police reformCHAPTER 3 – Functions of elected local policing bodies etc Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)22 Minimum budget for police and crime commissioner(1) Section 41 of the Police Act 1996 (directions as to minimum budget) is amended as follows.(2) In subsection (1)—(a) for “a police authority established under section 3” substitute “ a police and crime commissioner ”;(b) for “the authority” substitute “ the commissioner ”;[F15(c)	for “its” substitute “the commissioner's”.](3) After subsection (1) insert—“(1A) But the Secretary of State may not give a direction to the police and crime commissioner for a police area by virtue of subsection (1) unless the Secretary of State is satisfied that it is necessary to give the direction in order to prevent the safety of people in that police area from being put at risk.”.(4) In subsection (4)—(a) for “a police authority” substitute “ a police and crime commissioner ”;(b) for “the authority” substitute “ the commissioner ”.23 Minimum budget for Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime(1) The Greater London Authority Act 1999 is amended as follows.(2) Section 95 (minimum budget for Metropolitan Police Authority) is amended in accordance with subsections (3) to (7).(3) In the title, for “Metropolitan Police Authority” substitute “ Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime ”.(1) 
26	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)Part 1 – Police reformCHAPTER 3 – Functions of elected local policing bodies etcDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)(4) In subsection (1), for “Metropolitan Police Authority” substitute “ Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime ”.(5) In subsection (2), for “Metropolitan Police Authority” substitute “ Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime ”.(6) After subsection (2) insert—“(2A) But the Secretary of State may not give a direction to the Authority under subsection (2) unless the Secretary of State is satisfied that it is necessary to give the direction in order to prevent the safety of people in the metropolitan police district from being put at risk.”.(7) In subsections (3), (4) and (7), for “Metropolitan Police Authority” (in each place) substitute “ Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime ”.(8) In section 96 (provisions supplemental to section 95), in subsection (6), for “Metropolitan Police Authority” substitute “ Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime ”.24 Police grant(1) Section 46 of the Police Act 1996 (police grant) is amended as follows.(2) In subsection (1)—F16(a)	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .(b)	for the words after paragraph (b) substitute—“and in those provisions a reference to a grant recipient is a reference to a police and crime commissioner, the Common Council or the Greater London Authority.”.(3) In subsection (2)(b), for “authority” substitute “ grant recipient ”.(4) In subsection (4), for “police authorities” substitute “ grant recipients ”.(5) In subsection (5), for “different authorities or different classes of authority” substitute “ different grant recipients or different classes of grant recipient ”.(6) In subsection (7), for “police authority” substitute “ grant recipient ”.(7) In subsection (7A)—(a) for “Metropolitan Police Authority” substitute “ Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime ”;(b) for “that Authority” substitute “ that Office ”.(8) In subsection (8)—(a) for “an authority's” substitute “ a grant recipient's ”;(b) for “the authority” substitute “ the grant recipient ”;(c) for “an authority” substitute “ a grant recipient ”.(a) 
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)	27Part 1 – Police reformCHAPTER 3 – Functions of elected local policing bodies etc Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)(9) In subsection (9), for “Metropolitan Police Authority” substitute “ Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime ”.25 Other grants etc under Police Act 1996(1) The Police Act 1996 is amended as follows.(2) In section 47 (grants for capital expenditure)—(a) in subsection (1), for the words from “by” to “Authority”, substitute “ by local policing bodies ”;(b) in subsection (4), for “by virtue of subsection (1)(b)” substitute “ under subsection (1) in respect of expenditure incurred (or to be incurred) by the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime ”;(c) in subsection (5)—(i) for “Metropolitan Police Authority” substitute “ Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime ”;(ii) for “that Authority” substitute “ that Office ”.(3) In section 48 (grants for expenditure on safeguarding national security)—(a) in subsection (1), for the words from “by” to “security”, substitute “ by local policing bodies in connection with safeguarding national security ”;(b) in subsection (4), for “by virtue of subsection (1)(b)” substitute “ under subsection (1) in respect of expenditure incurred (or to be incurred) by the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime ”;(c) in subsection (5)—(i) for “Metropolitan Police Authority” substitute “ Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime ”;(ii) for “that Authority” substitute “ that Office ”.(4) In section 92 (grants by local authorities)—(a) in subsection (1), for “police authority established under section 3” substitute “ police and crime commissioner ”;(b) in subsection (2), for “Metropolitan Police Authority” substitute “ Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime ”.(5) In section 93 (acceptance of gifts or loans)—(a) in subsection (1), for “police authority” substitute “ local policing body ”;(b) in subsection (2), for “police authority” substitute “ local policing body ”.(6) Section 94 (financing of new police authorities) is amended as follows.(7) In the title, for “police authorities” substitute “ police and crime commissioners ”.(1) 
28	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)Part 1 – Police reformCHAPTER 3 – Functions of elected local policing bodies etcDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)(8) In subsection (1)—(a) for “police authority established under section 3” substitute “ police and crime commissioner ”;(b) for “it” substitute “ the commissioner ”.(9) In subsection (2)—(a) for “police authority established under section 3” substitute “ police and crime commissioner ”;(b) for “it” substitute “ the commissioner ”;(c) for “its” (in both places) substitute “ the commissioner's ”.(10) In subsection (3)—(a) for “an authority” substitute “ a commissioner ”;(b) for “its” substitute “ the commissioner's ”.(11) In subsection (4)—(a) for “a police authority” substitute “ a police and crime commissioner ”;(b) for “it” (in both places) substitute “ the commissioner ”.26 Precepts(1) The Local Government Finance Act 1992 is amended in accordance with subsections(2) and (3).(2) In section 39 (precepting and precepted authorities), in subsection (1) (major precepting authorities), for paragraph (b) substitute—“(b)	a police and crime commissioner;”.(3) In section 65 (duty to consult ratepayers), in subsection (3) (definition of relevant authority), after “major precepting authority” insert “ , apart from a police and crime commissioner ”.(4) Schedule 5 (issuing precepts) has effect.27 Other grants etc(1) Section 155 of the Local Government and Housing Act 1989 (emergency financial assistance to local authorities) is amended in accordance with subsections (2) and (3).(2) In subsection (1A) (grants to GLA functional bodies), for paragraph (b) substitute— “(b)	the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime, or”.(2) 
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)	29Part 1 – Police reformCHAPTER 4 – Accountability of elected local policing bodies Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)(3) In subsection (4) (meaning of local authority), for paragraph (ea) substitute— “(ea)  a police and crime commissioner;”.(4) In section 33 of the Local Government Act 2003 (interpretation of Chapter 1 of Part 3: expenditure grant), in subsection (1) (meaning of local authority), for paragraph (m) substitute—“(m)  a police and crime commissioner.”.CHAPTER 4ACCOUNTABILITY OF ELECTED LOCAL POLICING BODIESScrutiny of police and crime commissioners28 Police and crime panels outside London(1) Each police area, other than the metropolitan police district, is to have a police and crime panel established and maintained in accordance with Schedule 6 (police and crime panels).[F17(1A) Subsection (1B) applies if the person who is the police and crime commissioner for a police area is also the fire and rescue authority for the area which corresponds to, or an area which falls within, the police area.(1B) The police and crime panel for the police area is to be known as “the Police, Fire and Crime Panel”.](2) The functions of the police and crime panel for a police area must be exercised with a view to supporting the effective exercise of the functions of the police and crime commissioner for that police area.(3) A police and crime panel must—(a) review the draft police and crime plan, or draft variation, given to the panel by the relevant police and crime commissioner in accordance with section 5(6) (c), and(b) make a report or recommendations on the draft plan or variation to the commissioner.(4) A police and crime panel must—(a) arrange for a public meeting of the panel to be held as soon as practicable after the panel is sent an annual report under section 12,(b) ask the police and crime commissioner, at that meeting, such questions about the annual report as the members of the panel think appropriate,(c) review the annual report, and(d) make a report or recommendations on the annual report to the commissioner.(a) 
30	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)Part 1 – Police reformCHAPTER 4 – Accountability of elected local policing bodiesDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)(5) A police and crime panel has the functions conferred by Schedules 1 (procedure for appointments of senior staff), 5 (issuing precepts) and 8 (procedure for appointments by police and crime commissioners).(6) A police and crime panel must—(a) review or scrutinise decisions made, or other action taken, by the relevant police and crime commissioner in connection with the discharge of the commissioner's functions; and(b) make reports or recommendations to the relevant police and crime commissioner with respect to the discharge of the commissioner's functions,insofar as the panel is not otherwise required to do so by subsection (3) or (4) or by Schedule 1, 5 or 8.(7) A police and crime panel must publish any reports or recommendations made to the relevant police and crime commissioner.(8) The police and crime panel for a police area in England must send copies of any such reports or recommendations to each local authority whose area falls wholly or partly within the police area.(9) It is for the police and crime panel to determine the manner in which reports or recommendations are to be published in accordance with subsection (7).(10) Schedule 6 (police and crime panels) has effect.(11) In this section “local authority” means a county council or a district council.
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)	31Part 1 – Police reformCHAPTER 4 – Accountability of elected local policing bodies Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)29 Power to require attendance and information(1) A police and crime panel may require the relevant police and crime commissioner, and members of that commissioner's staff, to attend before the panel (at reasonable notice) to answer any question which appears to the panel to be necessary in order for it to carry out its functions.(2) Nothing in subsection (1) requires a member of the police and crime commissioner's staff to give any evidence, or produce any document, which discloses advice given to the commissioner by that person.(3) A police and crime panel may require the relevant police and crime commissioner to respond in writing (within a reasonable period determined by the panel) to any report or recommendation made by the panel to the commissioner.(4) The police and crime commissioner must comply with any requirement imposed by the panel under subsection (1) or (3).(5) Members of the staff of the police and crime commissioner must comply with any requirement imposed on them under subsection (1).(6) If a police and crime panel requires the relevant police and crime commissioner to attend before the panel, the panel may (at reasonable notice) request the relevant chief constable to attend before the panel on the same occasion to answer any question which appears to the panel to be necessary in order for it to carry out its functions.30 Suspension of police and crime commissioner(1) A police and crime panel may suspend the relevant police and crime commissioner if it appears to the panel that—(a) the commissioner has been charged in the United Kingdom, the Channel Islands or the Isle of Man with an offence, and(b) the offence is one which carries a maximum term of imprisonment exceeding two years.(a) 
32	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)Part 1 – Police reformCHAPTER 4 – Accountability of elected local policing bodiesDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)(2) The suspension of the police and crime commissioner ceases to have effect upon the occurrence of the earliest of these events—(a) the charge being dropped;(b) the police and crime commissioner being acquitted of the offence;(c) the police and crime commissioner being convicted of the offence but not being disqualified under section 66 by virtue of the conviction;(d) the termination of the suspension by the police and crime panel.(3) For the purposes of salary, pensions and allowances in respect of times during a period of suspension, the police and crime commissioner is to be treated as not holding that office during that suspension.(4) In this section references to an offence which carries a maximum term of imprisonment exceeding two years are references—(a) to an offence which carries such a maximum term in the case of a person who has attained the age of 18 years, or(b) to an offence for which, in the case of such a person, the sentence is fixed by law as life imprisonment.Conduct31 Conduct(1) The Secretary of State may, by regulations, make provision about—(a) the making and handling of complaints about the conduct of relevant office holders (“qualifying complaints”);(b) the recording of matters in the case of which there is an indication (whether from the circumstances or otherwise) that a relevant office holder may have committed a criminal offence (“conduct matters”);(c) the manner in which qualifying complaints and conduct matters are investigated or otherwise dealt with.(2) Schedule 7 (regulations about complaints and conduct matters) has effect.(3) In this section and that Schedule “relevant officer holder” means the holder of any of the following offices—(a) police and crime commissioner;(a) 
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)	33Part 1 – Police reformCHAPTER 4 – Accountability of elected local policing bodies Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)(b) deputy police and crime commissioner;(c) the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime;(d) Deputy Mayor for Policing and Crime.Scrutiny of Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime32 London Assembly police and crime panel(1) The London Assembly must arrange for the functions referred to in subsection (2) to be discharged on its behalf by a particular committee of the Assembly (the “police and crime panel”).(2) Those functions (“the police and crime panel functions”) are—(a) the functions conferred on the Assembly by section 33;(b) the functions conferred on the Assembly by section 60A of, and Schedule 4A to, the 1999 Act in relation to the appointment of the Deputy Mayor for Policing and Crime by the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime.(3) The London Assembly may not arrange for the police and crime panel functions to be discharged on its behalf otherwise than in accordance with subsection (1).(4) The London Assembly may not arrange for any of its other functions to be discharged by the police and crime panel.(5) The special scrutiny functions may only be exercised at a meeting of the whole panel; but that is without prejudice to rules of procedure about the quorum of a meeting of the whole panel.(6) The enactments applying to committees of the London Assembly, apart from the excluded provisions, apply to the police and crime panel as if the police and crime panel functions were to be discharged by the panel by virtue of arrangements under section 54(1)(a) of the 1999 Act.(7) In subsection (6), “excluded provisions” means the following provisions of the 1999 Act—(1) 
34	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)Part 1 – Police reformCHAPTER 4 – Accountability of elected local policing bodiesDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)(a) section 54(5), so far as it provides for the London Assembly to retain power to exercise functions delegated to a committee;(b) section 55 (Assembly committees and sub-committees).(8) The enactments conferring, or relating to, the police and crime panel functions are to be read with the appropriate modifications; in particular—(a) references to the London Assembly are to be read as references to the police and crime panel; and(b) references to proceedings of the London Assembly are to be read as references to proceedings of the police and crime panel.(9) For the purposes of subsection (8), references to the police and crime panel include references to a sub-committee or member (if any) by whom functions are to be discharged in accordance with section 54(3) of the 1999 Act.(10) The following provisions apply to the police and crime panel—(a) the number of members of the panel, and their term of office, are to be fixed by the London Assembly;(b) persons who are not members of the London Assembly may be members of the panel.(11) The following provisions apply to any sub-committee by which police and crime panel functions are to be discharged—(a) the number of members of the sub-committee, and their term of office, are to be fixed by the police and crime panel;(b) persons who are not members of the London Assembly may be members of the sub-committee.(12) The police and crime panel functions must be exercised with a view to supporting the effective exercise of the functions of the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime.(13) In this section—“1999 Act” means the Greater London Authority Act 1999; “special scrutiny functions” means the functions conferred—(a) by section 33(1), or(b) by section 60A of, and Schedule 4A to, the 1999 Act in relation to the appointment of the Deputy Mayor for Policing and Crime by the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime.33 Functions to be discharged by police and crime panel(1) The London Assembly must—(a) review the draft police and crime plan, or draft variation, given to the Assembly by the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime in accordance with section 6(6)(c), and(b) make a report or recommendations on the draft plan or variation to the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime.(a) 
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)	35Part 1 – Police reformCHAPTER 4 – Accountability of elected local policing bodies Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)(2) The London Assembly must keep under review the exercise of the functions of the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime, insofar as the Assembly is not otherwise required to do so by the other provisions of this section or by Schedule 4A to the 1999 Act.(3) For the purposes of subsection (2), the powers of the London Assembly include, in particular, power to investigate, and prepare reports about—(a) any actions and decisions of the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime;(b) any actions and decisions of the Deputy Mayor for Policing and Crime;(c) any actions and decisions of a member of staff of the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime;(d) matters relating to the functions of the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime;(e) matters in relation to which the functions of the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime are exercisable; or(f) any other matters which the Assembly considers to be of importance to policing and crime reduction in the metropolitan police district.(4) The London Assembly may submit proposals to the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime.(5) The London Assembly may require a person referred to in subsection (6)—(a) to attend proceedings of the Assembly for the purpose of giving evidence, or(b) to produce to the Assembly documents in the person's possession or under the person's control.(6) Those persons are—(a) the Deputy Mayor for Policing and Crime;(b) any member of the staff of the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime;(c) the person who is the occupant of the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime;(d) any person who has within the 8 years prior to the date of the requirement to be imposed under subsection (5) been the Deputy Mayor for Policing and Crime or the occupant of the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime.(7) Nothing in subsection (5) requires a member of the staff of the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime to give any evidence, or produce any document, which discloses advice given to the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime by that person.(8) If the London Assembly requires the Deputy Mayor for Policing and Crime, or the person who is the occupant of the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime, to attend proceedings, the Assembly may (at reasonable notice) request the Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis to attend proceedings on the same occasion for the purpose of giving evidence.(9) The following provisions of the 1999 Act apply (with appropriate modifications) to a requirement under subsection (5) as they apply to a requirement under section 61(1) of the 1999 Act—(a) section 61(14) (meaning of document etc);(b) section 62(3) to (6) (procedure for requiring attendance);(c) section 63 (restriction of information);(d) section 64 (failure to attend proceedings);(e) section 65 (openness).(a) 
36	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)Part 1 – Police reformCHAPTER 5 – Police forces in areas with elected local policing bodiesDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)(10) In this section “1999 Act” means the Greater London Authority Act 1999.CHAPTER 5POLICE FORCES IN AREAS WITH ELECTED LOCAL POLICING BODIESChief officers of police34 Engagement with local people(1) A chief officer of police must make arrangements for obtaining the views of persons within each neighbourhood in the relevant police area about crime and disorder in that neighbourhood.(2) A chief officer of police must make arrangements for providing persons within each neighbourhood in the relevant police area with information about policing in that neighbourhood (including information about how policing in that neighbourhood is aimed at dealing with crime and disorder there).(3) Arrangements under this section must provide for, or include arrangements for, the holding in each neighbourhood of regular meetings between—(a) persons within that neighbourhood, and(b) police officers with responsibility for supervising or carrying out policing in that neighbourhood.(4) It is for a chief officer of police to determine what the neighbourhoods are in the relevant police area.35 Value for money(1) In exercising functions, a chief officer of police must secure that good value for money is obtained.(2) That includes securing that the persons under the direction and control of the chief officer of police obtain good value for money in exercising their functions.
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)	37Part 1 – Police reformCHAPTER 5 – Police forces in areas with elected local policing bodies Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)36 Information for elected local policing bodies(1) A chief officer of police must give the relevant elected local policing body such information on policing matters that the body may require the chief officer to give.(2) Such information must be in the form (if any) specified by the elected local policing body.(3) The elected local policing body may—(a) arrange for such information to be published, or(b) require the chief officer of police to arrange for such information to be published.(4) It is for the elected local policing body to determine the manner in which information is to be published in accordance with subsection (3) (a) or (b).(5) In this section “policing matters” means matters connected with the policing of the relevant police area.37 Appointment of persons not employed by chief officers of police(1) This section applies where a chief officer of police is required or authorised by any Act—(a) to appoint a person to a specified post in the relevant police force, or a specified post in the civilian staff of the relevant police force, or(b) to designate a person as having specified duties or responsibilities.(2) The chief officer of police may appoint or designate a person whether or not the person is already a member of staff of the police force.(3) Subsection (2) has effect in spite of any provision to the contrary in the Act that is mentioned in subsection (1).Police forces outside London38 Appointment, suspension and removal of chief constables(1) The police and crime commissioner for a police area is to appoint the chief constable of the police force for that area.(2) The police and crime commissioner for a police area may suspend from duty the chief constable of the police force for that area.(1) 
38	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)Part 1 – Police reformCHAPTER 5 – Police forces in areas with elected local policing bodiesDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)(3) The police and crime commissioner for a police area may call upon the chief constable of the police force for that area to resign or retire.(4) The chief constable must retire or resign if called upon to do so by the relevant police and crime commissioner in accordance with subsection (3).(5) Schedule 8 (appointment, suspension and removal of senior police officers) has effect.(6) This section is subject to Parts 1 and 2 of Schedule 8.(7) This section and Schedule 8 are subject to regulations under section 50 of the Police Act 1996.39 Deputy chief constables(1) Each police force must have one or more deputy chief constables.(2) The chief constable of a police force must consult the relevant police and crime commissioner before increasing the number of deputy chief constables which the force has.(3) The chief constable of a police force must consult the relevant police and crime commissioner before appointing a person to be a deputy chief constable of the force.(4) The chief constable of a police force may suspend from duty a deputy chief constable of that police force.(5) The chief constable of a police force may call upon a deputy chief constable of that police force to resign or retire.(6) A deputy chief constable must resign or retire if called upon to do so by the chief constable in accordance with subsection (5).(7) Subsections (3) to (6) are subject to regulations under section 50 of the Police Act 1996.(8) Subsections (4) to (6) are subject to Part 3 of Schedule 8 (suspension and removal of other senior police officers).(9) In this section “police force” means the police force for a police area listed in Schedule 1 to the Police Act 1996 (police areas outside London).40 Assistant chief constables(1) Each police force must have one or more assistant chief constables.(1) 
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)	39Part 1 – Police reformCHAPTER 5 – Police forces in areas with elected local policing bodies Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)(2) The chief constable of a police force must consult the relevant police and crime commissioner before appointing a person as an assistant chief constable of the force.(3) The chief constable of a police force may suspend from duty an assistant chief constable of that police force.(4) The chief constable of a police force may call upon an assistant chief constable of that police force to resign or retire.(5) An assistant chief constable must resign or retire if called upon to do so by the chief constable in accordance with subsection (4).(6) Subsections (2) to (5) are subject to regulations under section 50 of the Police Act 1996.(7) Subsections (3) to (5) are subject to Part 3 of Schedule 8 (suspension and removal of other senior police officers).(8) In this section “police force” means the police force for a police area listed in Schedule 1 to the Police Act 1996 (police areas outside London).41 Power of deputy to exercise functions of chief constable(1) The appropriate deputy chief constable of a police force may exercise or perform any or all of the functions of the chief constable of the force—(a) during any period when the chief constable is unable to exercise functions, or(b) at any other time, with the consent of the chief constable.(2) For the purposes of subsection (1), the appropriate deputy chief constable is—(a) if the police force has only one deputy chief constable, the deputy chief constable;(b) if the police force has more than one deputy chief constable, the most senior deputy chief constable.(3) If the police force has more than one deputy chief constable, the chief constable must designate the deputy chief constables in order of seniority for the purposes of subsection (2)(b).(4) During any absence, incapacity or suspension from duty of the person who—(a) is designated as the most senior deputy chief constable for the purposes of subsection (2)(b), or(b) is treated under this section as the most senior deputy chief constable,the person designated as the next most senior deputy chief constable is to be treated as the most senior one for the purposes of subsection (2)(b).(5) The assistant chief constable designated for this purpose by the chief constable of the force may exercise any or all of the chief constable's functions during any period when—(a) the chief constable is unable to exercise functions, and(a) 
40	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)Part 1 – Police reformCHAPTER 5 – Police forces in areas with elected local policing bodiesDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)(b) a deputy chief constable is unable to exercise functions.(6) The chief constable of the force must designate an assistant chief constable of the force for the purposes of subsection (5).(7) Only one person is authorised to act at any one time by virtue of a designation by the chief constable.(8) The chief constable must consult the relevant police and crime commissioner before making a designation for the purposes of subsection (2)(b) or (5).(9) This section is without prejudice to any other enactment that makes provision for a person other than the chief constable to exercise the chief constable's functions.(10) In a case where a deputy chief constable or assistant chief constable (the “acting chief constable”) is authorised by subsection (1)(a) or (5) to exercise or perform functions of a chief constable—(a) section 38(2) and (3) apply in relation to the acting chief constable as they apply in relation to the chief constable (and references to chief constables in those provisions, and in other enactments relating to those provisions, are to be read accordingly); and(b) section 39(4) and (5) or section 40(3) and (4) do not apply in relation to the acting chief constable.(11) In this section—(a) “police force” means the police force for a police area listed in Schedule 1 to the Police Act 1996 (police areas outside London);(b) a reference to a period when the chief constable is unable to exercise functions is a reference to a period when—(i) the chief constable is absent, incapacitated or suspended from duty, or(ii) the office of chief constable is vacant;(c) a reference to a period when a deputy chief constable is unable to exercise functions is a reference to a period when—(i) the deputy chief constable, or each of the deputy chief constables, is absent, incapacitated or suspended from duty, or(ii) the office of deputy chief constable, or of each deputy chief constable, is vacant.The metropolitan police force42 Appointment of Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis(1) The Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis is to be appointed by Her Majesty by warrant under Her sign manual.(2) A constable holds office as the Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis at Her Majesty's pleasure.(1) 
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)	41Part 1 – Police reformCHAPTER 5 – Police forces in areas with elected local policing bodies Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)(3) The Secretary of State may not recommend to Her Majesty that She appoint a person as the Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis unless that person [F18is eligible for appointment]; and, before making such a recommendation, the Secretary of State must have regard to any recommendations made by the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime.[F19(3A) A person is eligible for appointment if the person is or has been—(a) a constable in any part of the United Kingdom, or(b) a police officer in an approved overseas police force, of at least the approved rank.[ But a person who would be eligible for appointment by virtue of subsection (3A) isF20(3AA) not eligible for appointment at a time when the person is included in the police barred list maintained under section 88B of the Police Act 1996.](3B) An “approved overseas police force” is a police force which—(a) is in a country or territory outside the United Kingdom designated by regulations made by the Secretary of State, and(b) is designated in relation to that country or territory by the regulations.(3C) The “approved rank” for an approved overseas police force is the rank which is designated as the approved rank for that police force by the regulations.(3D) The College of Policing must recommend to the Secretary of State matters to be designated under this section.(3E) The Secretary of State may make regulations under this section only if they give effect to a recommendation under subsection (3D).](4) The appointment of the Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis is subject to regulations under section 50 of the Police Act 1996.43 Deputy Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis(1) The Metropolitan Police force has one Deputy Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis.(2) The Deputy Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis is to be appointed by Her Majesty by warrant under Her sign manual.(1) 
42	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)Part 1 – Police reformCHAPTER 5 – Police forces in areas with elected local policing bodiesDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)(3) A person holds office as the Deputy Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis at Her Majesty's pleasure.[F21(3A) The Secretary of State may not recommend to Her Majesty that She appoint a person as the Deputy Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis unless that person is eligible for appointment.(3B) A person is not eligible for appointment at a time when the person is included in the police barred list maintained under section 88B of the Police Act 1996.](4) Before recommending to Her Majesty that She appoint a person as the Deputy Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis, the Secretary of State must have regard to—(a) any recommendations made by the Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis, and(b) any representations made by the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime.(5) The appointment of the Deputy Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis is subject to regulations under section 50 of the Police Act 1996.44 Functions of Deputy Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis(1) The Deputy Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis may exercise any or all of the powers and duties of the Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis—(a) during any absence, incapacity or suspension from duty of the Commissioner,(b) during any vacancy in the office of Commissioner, or(c) at any other time, with the consent of the Commissioner.(2) The Deputy Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis does not have power to act by virtue of subsection (1)(a) or (b) for a continuous period exceeding three months, except with the consent of the Secretary of State.(3) The Deputy Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis has all the powers and duties of an Assistant Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis.
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)	43Part 1 – Police reformCHAPTER 5 – Police forces in areas with elected local policing bodies Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)45 Assistant Commissioners of Police of the Metropolis(1) The metropolitan police force must have one or more Assistant Commissioners of Police of the Metropolis.(2) The Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis must consult the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime before appointing a person as an Assistant Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis.(3) The appointment of a person as an Assistant Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis is subject to regulations under section 50 of the Police Act 1996.(4) An Assistant Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis may exercise any of the powers and duties of the Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis with the consent of the Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis.(5) Subsection (4) is without prejudice to regulations under section 50 of the Police Act 1996.(6) In a case where an Assistant Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis is acting in place of the Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis—(a) section 48 applies in relation to the Assistant Commissioner as it applies to the Commissioner (and references to the Commissioner in that section, and in other enactments relating to that section, are to be read accordingly); and(b) section 49 does not apply in relation to the Assistant Commissioner.(7) For the purposes of subsection (6), an Assistant Commissioner is to be taken to be acting in place of the Commissioner at a particular time if—(a) the Assistant Commissioner is, at that time, authorised by subsection (4) to exercise powers and duties of the Commissioner, and(b) that time falls during—(i) any absence, incapacity or suspension from office of the Commissioner, or(ii) any vacancy in the office of Commissioner.46 Deputy Assistant Commissioners of Police of the Metropolis(1) The metropolitan police force must have one or more Deputy Assistant Commissioners of Police of the Metropolis.(2) The Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis must consult the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime before appointing a person as a Deputy Assistant Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis.(3) The appointment of a person as a Deputy Assistant Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis is subject to regulations under section 50 of the Police Act 1996.(1) 
44	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)Part 1 – Police reformCHAPTER 5 – Police forces in areas with elected local policing bodiesDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)47 Commanders(1) The metropolitan police force must have one or more Commanders.(2) The Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis must consult the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime before appointing a person as a Commander.(3) The appointment of a person as a Commander is subject to regulations under section 50 of the Police Act 1996.48 Suspension and removal of Commissioner and Deputy Commissioner(1) The Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime may, with the approval of the Secretary of State—(a) suspend the Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis from duty, or(b) suspend the Deputy Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis from duty.(2) If the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime suspends the Commissioner, or Deputy Commissioner, from duty, that Office must notify the Secretary of State of the suspension.(3) The Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime may, subject to subsections (5) and (6), and with the approval of the Secretary of State—(a) call upon the Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis to resign or retire, or(b) call upon the Deputy Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis to resign or retire.(4) The Commissioner, or Deputy Commissioner, must resign or retire if called upon to do so in accordance with subsection (3).(5) Before calling upon the Commissioner, or Deputy Commissioner, to retire or resign, the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime must—(a) give the police officer a written explanation of the reasons why the Office is proposing to call for the retirement or resignation;(b) give the police officer the opportunity to make written representations about the proposal to call for the police officer's resignation or retirement; and(c) consider any written representations made by the police officer.(6) The Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime must comply with subsection (5) before seeking the approval of the Secretary of State to call upon the Commissioner, or Deputy Commissioner, to retire or resign.(7) This section is subject to regulations under section 50 of the Police Act 1996.(1) 
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)	45Part 1 – Police reformCHAPTER 5 – Police forces in areas with elected local policing bodies Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)(8) This section is without prejudice to—(a) section 42(2);(b) section 43(3); or(c) regulations under the Police Pensions Act 1976.49 Suspension and removal of other senior metropolitan police officers(1) The Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis may suspend a senior metropolitan police officer from duty.(2) If the Commissioner suspends a senior metropolitan police officer from duty, the Commissioner must notify the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime of the suspension.(3) The Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis may, subject to subsection (5), and after consulting the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime, call upon a senior metropolitan police officer to resign or retire.(4) A senior metropolitan police officer must resign or retire if called upon to do so in accordance with subsection (3).(5) Before calling upon a senior metropolitan police officer to retire or resign, the Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis must—(a) give the police officer a written explanation of the reasons why the Commissioner is proposing to call for the retirement or resignation;(b) give the police officer the opportunity to make written representations about the proposal to call for the police officer's resignation or retirement; and(c) consider any written representations made by the police officer.(6) This section is subject to regulations under section 50 of the Police Act 1996.(7) This section is without prejudice to regulations under the Police Pensions Act 1976.(8) In this section “senior metropolitan police officer” means any of the following—(a) an Assistant Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis;(b) a Deputy Assistant Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis;(c) a Commander.
46	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)Part 1 – Police reformCHAPTER 6 – Police and crime commissioners: elections and vacanciesDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)CHAPTER 6POLICE AND CRIME COMMISSIONERS: ELECTIONS AND VACANCIESHolding of elections50 Ordinary elections(1) An election of police and crime commissioners for all police areas (an “ordinary election”) is to be held—(a) in 2012;(b) in each subsequent fourth year.(2) The poll at the ordinary election of police and crime commissioners in 2012 is to be held on 15 November 2012.(3) The poll at an ordinary election of police and crime commissioners in any year after 2012 is to be held on [F22the first Thursday in May] in the year of the election.(4) But, if the Secretary of State F23... so specifies in an order, the poll at an ordinary election of police and crime commissioners in any year after 2012 is to be held on such day in the year of the election as may be specified in the order.(5) An order under subsection (4)—(a) may not specify, as the day of a poll, a day which is before [F24the first Thursday in May] in the year of the election;(b) may not be made within the period of six months ending with [F25the first Thursday in May] in the year of the election (or the first of the elections) to which the order relates.F26(6) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .(7) The term of office of a person elected as a police and crime commissioner at an ordinary election—(a) begins with the seventh day after the day of the poll at the election, and(b) ends with the sixth day after the day of the poll at the next ordinary election of police and crime commissioners.(8) Subsection (7) is subject to any provision of or made under this or any other Act relating to the appointment or election of police and crime commissioners or their ceasing to hold office.
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)	47Part 1 – Police reformCHAPTER 6 – Police and crime commissioners: elections and vacancies Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)51 Election to fill vacancy in office of commissioner(1) This section applies where a vacancy occurs in the office of police and crime commissioner for a police area.(2) An election must be held to fill the vacancy.(3) The police area returning officer must fix the date of the poll at the election.(4) The date fixed must be not more than 35 days after the relevant event (computed in accordance with section 73).(5) For the purposes of subsection (4), “the relevant event” means—(a) in a case where the High Court or the appropriate officer has declared the office to be vacant, the making of that declaration;(b) in any other case, the giving of notice of the vacancy to the appropriate officer by two or more relevant electors.[F27(6) A person is a relevant elector for the purposes of subsection (5) in relation to a police area in England if the person is registered in a register of local government electors in respect of an address within the police area.(6A) A person is a relevant elector for the purposes of subsection (5) in relation to a police area in Wales if subsection (6B) or (6C) applies.(6B) This subsection applies if—(a) the person is registered in a register of parliamentary electors in respect of an address within the police area, and(b) the registration is not in pursuance of an overseas elector's declaration.(6C) This subsection applies if—(a) the person is [F28—(i) disqualified as a peer from voting as an elector at parliamentary elections, or(i) 
48	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)Part 1 – Police reformCHAPTER 6 – Police and crime commissioners: elections and vacanciesDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)(ii) a qualifying EU citizen, or an EU citizen with retained rights, who has attained the age of 18], and(b) the person is registered in a register of local government electors in respect of an address within the police area.](7) If the vacancy occurs within the period of six months ending with the day of the poll at the next ordinary election of police and crime commissioners—(a) no election is to be held under subsection (2) in respect of the vacancy, and(b) accordingly, the office is to be left unfilled until that ordinary election.(8) The term of office of a person elected as a police and crime commissioner for a police area at an election to fill a vacancy in the office—(a) begins immediately the person is declared to be elected as police and crime commissioner for the area;(b) ends at the time when it would have ended had the person been elected at the most recent ordinary election of police and crime commissioners.(9) In the case of a vacancy occurring in consequence of the failure of, or other irregularity in relation to, an election, subsections (3) and (4) have effect subject to any provision made by an order under section 58.52 Persons entitled to vote(1) A person is entitled to vote as an elector at an election of a police and crime commissioner for a police area [F29in England] if on the date of the poll—(a) the person would be entitled to vote as an elector at a local government election in an electoral area wholly or partly comprised in the police area, and(a) 
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)	49Part 1 – Police reformCHAPTER 6 – Police and crime commissioners: elections and vacancies Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)(b) the address in respect of which the person is registered in the register of local government electors for that electoral area is within the police area.[F30(1A) A person is entitled to vote as an elector at an election of a police and crime commissioner for a police area in Wales if subsection (1B) or (1C) applies.(1B) This subsection applies if on the date of the poll—(a) the person would be entitled to vote as an elector at a parliamentary election in a constituency wholly or partly comprised in the police area,(b) the address in respect of which the person is registered in the register of parliamentary electors for that constituency is within the police area, and(c) the registration is not in pursuance of an overseas elector's declaration.(1C) This subsection applies if on the date of the poll—(a) the person is [F31—(i) disqualified as a peer from voting as an elector at parliamentary elections, or(ii) a qualifying EU citizen, or an EU citizen with retained rights, who has attained the age of 18,](b) the person would be entitled to vote as an elector at a local government election in an electoral area wholly or partly comprised in the police area, and(c) the address in respect of which the person is registered in the register of local government electors for that electoral area is within the police area.](2) A person is not entitled to vote as an elector more than once in the same police area at any election of a police and crime commissioner.53 Public awareness about elections: role of Electoral CommissionThe Electoral Commission must, in relation to—(a) each ordinary election of police and crime commissioners under section 50,(b) each election to fill a vacancy in the office of police and crime commissioner for a police area under section 51,(a) 
50	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)Part 1 – Police reformCHAPTER 6 – Police and crime commissioners: elections and vacanciesDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)take such steps as it considers appropriate to raise public awareness about the election and how to vote in it.Conduct of elections54 Returning officers etc(1) The returning officer for an election of a police and crime commissioner for a police area (“the police area returning officer”) is to be a person who—(a) is an acting returning officer by virtue of section 28(1) of the Representation of the People Act 1983 (acting returning officer for parliamentary election) for a constituency falling wholly or partly within the police area, and(b) is designated for the purposes of this subsection by order of the Secretary of State F32....(2) The Secretary of State F33... may by regulations confer functions—(a) on police area returning officers, and(b) on local returning officers.(3) Regulations under subsection (2) may apply or incorporate, with or without modifications or exceptions, any relevant provision.(4) Each relevant local authority must place the services of its officers at the disposal of any person on whom functions are conferred under subsection (2) in relation to the police area for the purpose of assisting that person in the discharge of those functions.(5) In this section—“local authority” means—(a) a district council,(b) a county council in England for a county in which there are no district councils,(c) the Council of the Isles of Scilly,(d) a county council or county borough council in Wales;“local election” means an election of members of a local authority;  “local returning officer” means a person who, by virtue of section 35 of the Representation of the People Act 1983, is a returning officer for any local elections;  “relevant local authority”, in relation to a police area, means a local authority whose area falls wholly or partly within the police area;  “relevant provision” means any provision (whenever passed or made) of, or made under, any of the following—  
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)	51Part 1 – Police reformCHAPTER 6 – Police and crime commissioners: elections and vacancies Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)(a) the Representation of the People Acts,(b) the Local Government Act 1972,(c) the Local Government Act 2000,(d) the Political Parties, Elections and Referendums Act 2000,(e) F34...(f) the Government of Wales Act 2006, and(g) any other enactment relating to parliamentary elections F34... or local government elections.55 Returning officers: expenditure(1) A returning officer may recover charges in respect of services rendered, or expenses incurred, by the officer for or in connection with an election of a police and crime commissioner if—(a) the services were necessarily rendered, or the expenses were necessarily incurred, for the efficient and effective conduct of the election, and(b) the total of the officer's charges does not exceed the amount (“the overall maximum recoverable amount”) specified in, or determined in accordance with, an order made by the [F35Secretary of State], with the consent of the Treasury, for the purposes of this subsection.(2) An order under subsection (1) may specify, or make provision for determining in accordance with the order, a maximum recoverable amount for services or expenses of any specified description.(3) Subject to subsection (4), the returning officer may not recover more than the specified maximum recoverable amount in respect of any specified services or expenses.(1) 
52	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)Part 1 – Police reformCHAPTER 6 – Police and crime commissioners: elections and vacanciesDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)(4) In a particular case the [F36Secretary of State] may authorise the payment of—(a) more than the overall maximum recoverable amount, or(b) more than the specified maximum recoverable amount for any specified services or expenses,if the [F36Secretary of State] is satisfied that the conditions in subsection (5) are met.(5) Those conditions are—(a) that it was reasonable for the returning officer concerned to render the services or incur the expenses, and(b) that the charges in question are reasonable.(6) The amount of any charges recoverable in accordance with this section is to be paid by the [F37Secretary of State] on an account being submitted to the [F37Secretary of State].(7) But the [F37Secretary of State] may, before payment, apply for the account to be taxed under section 56.(8) Where the superannuation contributions required to be paid by a local authority in respect of any person are increased by any fee paid under this section as part of a returning officer's charges at an election of a police and crime commissioner, then on an account being submitted to the [F37Secretary of State] a sum equal to the increase must be paid to the authority by the [F37Secretary of State].(9) On the request of a returning officer for an advance on account of the officer's charges, the [F37Secretary of State] may make such an advance on such terms as the [F37Secretary of State] thinks fit.(10) The [F37Secretary of State] may by regulations make provision as to—(a) the time when, and(b) the manner and form in which,accounts are to be rendered to the [F37Secretary of State] for the purposes of the payment of a returning officer's charges.(11) Any sums required by the [F37Secretary of State] for making payments under this section are to be charged on, and paid out of, the Consolidated Fund.(12) In this section—“local authority” has the same meaning as in section 54;“local returning officer” has the same meaning as in that section;F38...“returning officer” means—(a) a police area returning officer, or(b) a local returning officer on whom functions are conferred under subsection (2) of [F39section 54];  “specified” means specified in, or determined in accordance with, an order under subsection (1).
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)	53Part 1 – Police reformCHAPTER 6 – Police and crime commissioners: elections and vacancies Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)56 Taxation of returning officer's account(1) Any application under section 55(7) for a returning officer's account to be taxed is to be made to the county court.(2) On any such application the court has jurisdiction—(a) to tax the account—(i) in such manner, and    (ii) at such time and place, as the court thinks fit, and(b) finally to determine the amount payable to the returning officer.(3) On any such application the returning officer may apply to the court to examine any claim made by any person against the officer in respect of matters charged in the account.(4) Where an application is made in respect of a claim under subsection (3)—(a) notice of the application must be given to the claimant;(b) the court must give the claimant an opportunity to be heard and to tender any evidence;(c) the court may allow or disallow the claim, with or without costs;(d) the determination of the court is final for all purposes and as against all persons.(5) In this section “returning officer” has the same meaning as in section 55.(1) 
54	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)Part 1 – Police reformCHAPTER 6 – Police and crime commissioners: elections and vacanciesDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)57 Voting at elections of police and crime commissioners(1) This section applies to any election under this Chapter of a police and crime commissioner for a police area.(2) The commissioner is to be returned under the simple majority systemF40....F41(3) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .F41(4) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .F41(5) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .58 Power to make provision about elections etc(1) The Secretary of State F42... may by order make provision as to—(a) the conduct of elections of persons to be police and crime commissioners;(b) the questioning of such an election and the consequences of irregularities.(2) The provision which may be made under subsection (1)(a) includes, in particular, provision—(a) about registration of electors;(b) for disregarding alterations in a register of electors;(c) about the registration or other recognition of political parties and other persons incurring expenditure in relation to elections of police and crime commissioners;(a) 
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)	55Part 1 – Police reformCHAPTER 6 – Police and crime commissioners: elections and vacancies Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)(d) about funding and expenditure, in relation to elections of police and crime commissioners, of candidates, political parties and other persons incurring such expenditure;(e) for the combination of polls at elections of police and crime commissioners and other polls;(f) for any election held in consequence of any irregularity at an ordinary election to be treated as held at an ordinary election for any of the purposes of this Act.(3) An order under subsection (1) may—(a) apply or incorporate, with or without modifications or exceptions, any relevant provision;(b) modify any form contained in any relevant provision so far as may be necessary to enable it to be used both for the original purpose and in relation to elections for police and crime commissioners;(c) include provision creating criminal offences.(4) Provision within paragraph (d) of subsection (2) includes, in particular—(a) provision prohibiting, or imposing limitations on, funding or expenditure of any kind mentioned in that paragraph, and(b) provision for treating funding or expenditure of any such kind which does not relate exclusively to an election of police and crime commissioners as being (or not being), wholly or partly, funding or expenditure in relation to which—(i) any provision within paragraph (a) applies, or(ii) any relevant provision applies.(5) The Secretary of State F43... may by order make modifications of any relevant provision that are consequential on any provision of—(a) section 1(4),(b) this Chapter,(c) an order under subsection (1), or(d) regulations under section 54.F44(5A) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .(6) Provision that may be made under subsection (5) includes, in particular, provision modifying any relevant provision so as to apply (with or without modifications)—(a) in relation to elections for police and crime commissioners as it applies in relation to other elections;(b) in relation to police and crime commissioners as it applies in relation to persons elected at other elections.(7) In this section—  “relevant provision” means any provision (whenever passed or made) of, or made under, any of the following—(a) the Representation of the People Acts,(b) the Local Government Act 1972,(c) the Local Government Act 2000,(d) the Political Parties, Elections and Referendums Act 2000,(e) F45...(f) the Government of Wales Act 2006, and(a) 
56	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)Part 1 – Police reformCHAPTER 6 – Police and crime commissioners: elections and vacanciesDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)(g) any other enactment relating to parliamentary elections F45... or local government elections;  “modify” includes amend, repeal or revoke (and related terms are to be read accordingly).Vacancy in office of police and crime commissioner59 Date of vacancy in office of commissioner(1) For the purposes of this Chapter, a vacancy in the office of police and crime commissioner for a police area is to be regarded as occurring—(a) in the case of a vacancy in consequence of the failure of, or other irregularity in relation to, an election, at the time specified in an order under section 58;(b) in the case of resignation, on receipt of the notice of resignation by the appropriate officer;(c) in the case of death, on the date of death;(d) in any case within subsection (2), on the date on which the office of police and crime commissioner for the police area is declared to have been vacated by the High Court or by the appropriate officer, as the case may be.[F46(e) in the case of disqualification by virtue of an order under section 30 of the Elections Act 2022 (disqualification of offenders for holding elective office etc), on the date the office is vacated in accordance with section 31 of that Act (vacation of office etc).]
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)	57Part 1 – Police reformCHAPTER 6 – Police and crime commissioners: elections and vacancies Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)(2) The cases referred to in subsection (1)(d) are—(a) where the person elected as police and crime commissioner fails to make and deliver a declaration of acceptance of office in accordance with section 70;(b) where a vacancy arises under section 63 (incapacity of commissioner: acting commissioner acting for 6 months);(c) where a person becomes disqualified—(i) from being a police and crime commissioner, or(ii) from being the police and crime commissioner for the police area.[F47(2A) In a case where subsection (1)(e) and (d) (in the case of a disqualification by virtue of section 66(3)(c)) apply in relation to a vacancy, the vacancy is to be regarded as occurring on the date mentioned in subsection (1)(e).](3) The appropriate officer must give public notice of a vacancy in the office of police and crime commissioner for a police area.(4) The appropriate officer must give notice of a vacancy in the office of police and crime commissioner for a police area to the police area returning officer.(5) Any notice under subsection (3) or (4) must be given as soon as practicable after the date on which the vacancy is to be regarded under this section as occurring.60 Declaration of vacancy in certain cases(1) Subsection (2) applies where—(a) a police and crime commissioner for a police area becomes disqualified (whether by virtue of this or any other Act)—(i) from being a police and crime commissioner, or(ii) from being the police and crime commissioner for the police area,(b) the person elected as police and crime commissioner for a police area fails to make and deliver a declaration of acceptance of office in accordance with section 70, or(c) a vacancy arises under section 63 (incapacity of commissioner: acting commissioner acting for 6 months).(a) 
58	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)Part 1 – Police reformCHAPTER 6 – Police and crime commissioners: elections and vacanciesDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)(2) The appropriate officer must forthwith declare the office of police and crime commissioner for that police area to be vacant, unless—(a) it has been declared vacant by the High Court, or(b) an application has been made to the High Court for a declaration under section 71 and the grounds in issue include any ground on which the appropriate officer would (but for this paragraph) make the declaration.61 Resignation of commissioner(1) A police and crime commissioner may at any time resign office by giving notice to the appropriate officer.(2) Any such resignation takes effect on the officer's receipt of the notice.Vacancy or incapacity62 Appointment of acting commissioner(1) The police and crime panel for a police area must appoint a person to act as police and crime commissioner for that area (the “acting commissioner”) if—(a) no person holds the office of police and crime commissioner for that area,(b) the police and crime commissioner for that area is incapacitated, or(c) the police and crime commissioner for that area is suspended in accordance with section 30.(2) The police and crime panel may appoint a person as acting commissioner only if the person is a member of the police and crime commissioner's staff at the time of the appointment.(3) In appointing a person as acting commissioner in a case where the police and crime commissioner is incapacitated, the police and crime panel must have regard to any representations made by the commissioner in relation to the appointment.(1) 
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)	59Part 1 – Police reformCHAPTER 6 – Police and crime commissioners: elections and vacancies Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)(4) All the functions of a police and crime commissioner are exercisable by an acting commissioner, apart from issuing or varying a police and crime plan under section 5.(5) Any property or rights vested in the police and crime commissioner may be dealt with by the acting commissioner as if vested in the acting commissioner.(6) The appointment of an acting commissioner ceases to have effect upon the occurrence of the earliest of these events—(a) the election of a person as police and crime commissioner;(b) the termination by the police and crime panel, or by the acting commissioner, of the appointment of the acting commissioner;(c) in a case where the acting commissioner is appointed because the police and crime commissioner is incapacitated, the commissioner ceasing to be incapacitated;(d) in a case where the acting commissioner is appointed because the police and crime commissioner is suspended, the commissioner ceasing to be suspended.(7) In a case where—(a) the acting commissioner is appointed because the police and crime commissioner is incapacitated or suspended, and(b) a vacancy subsequently occurs in the office of police and crime commissioner,the occurrence of that vacancy does not affect the appointment of the acting commissioner (and accordingly subsection (6)(c) or (d) does not apply).(8) For the purposes of this section—(a) a police and crime commissioner is incapacitated if the commissioner is unable to exercise the functions of commissioner, except where the commissioner is unable to exercise those functions only because the commissioner has yet to give a declaration of office under section 70; and(b) it is for the police and crime panel for a police area to determine whether or not the police and crime commissioner for that area is incapacitated.(9) Subject to subsection (4), a reference in any enactment to a police and crime commissioner includes a reference to an acting commissioner.
60	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)Part 1 – Police reformCHAPTER 6 – Police and crime commissioners: elections and vacanciesDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)63 Vacancy where acting commissioner acts for 6 months(1) Subsection (2) applies where—(a) an acting commissioner is appointed under section 62 to act for the police and crime commissioner for a police area because the police and crime commissioner is incapacitated, and(b) the police and crime commissioner does not cease to be incapacitated during the period of 6 months beginning with the day on which the acting commissioner is appointed.(2) At the end of that 6 month period—(a) the police and crime commissioner ceases to be police and crime commissioner, and(b) accordingly, the office of police and crime commissioner for that police area becomes vacant.Disqualification64 Disqualification from election as police and crime commissioner(1) A person is disqualified from being elected to the office of police and crime commissioner for a police area [F48in England] at any election unless—(a) the person has attained the age of 18 when nominated as a candidate at the election, and(b) on each relevant day, the person is registered in the register of local government electors for an electoral area in respect of an address in the police area.[F49(1A) A person is disqualified from being elected to the office of police and crime commissioner for a police area in Wales at any election unless—(a) the person has attained the age of 18 when nominated as a candidate at the election, and(b) on each relevant day subsection (1B) or (1C) applies.(1B) This subsection applies if—(a) the person is registered in a register of parliamentary electors in respect of an address within the police area, and      (b) the registration is not in pursuance of an overseas elector's declaration. (1C) This subsection applies if—      (a) 
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)	61Part 1 – Police reformCHAPTER 6 – Police and crime commissioners: elections and vacancies Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)(a) the person is disqualified as a peer from voting as an elector at parliamentary elections, or is a [F50qualifying EU citizen or an EU citizen with retained rights], and(b) the person is registered in a register of local government electors in respect of an address within the police area.](2) In this section “relevant day”, in relation to a person who is a candidate at an election, means—(a) the day on which the person is nominated as a candidate at the election;(b) the day of the poll at the election.(3) A person is disqualified from being elected to the office of police and crime commissioner for a police area at an ordinary election if the person has been nominated as a candidate for election as police and crime commissioner for any other police area at that election.[F51(3A) A person is disqualified from being elected to the office of police and crime commissioner for a police area at an ordinary election if the person—(a) has been nominated as a candidate for election as mayor for the area of a combined authority at an election to be held on the same day; and(b) by virtue of an order under section 107F(1) of the Local Democracy, Economic Development and Construction Act 2009, the mayor would exercise functions of a police and crime commissioner in relation to the area.](4) A person is disqualified from being elected to the office of police and crime commissioner for a police area at an election other than an ordinary election if—(a) the person is police and crime commissioner for any other police area, or(b) the person has been nominated as a candidate for election as police and crime commissioner for any other police area for which an election is held on the same day.[F52(4A) A person is disqualified from being elected to the office of police and crime commissioner for a police area at an election other than an ordinary election if—(a) the person is a mayor who, by virtue of an order under section 107F(1) of the Local Democracy, Economic Development and Construction Act 2009, exercises functions of a police and crime commissioner for the area of a combined authority; or(b) the person has been nominated as a candidate for election as a mayor who, by virtue of such an order, would exercise such functions and the election would take place on the same day.]
62	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)Part 1 – Police reformCHAPTER 6 – Police and crime commissioners: elections and vacanciesDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)65 Disqualification from election or holding office as police and crime commissioner: police grounds(1) A person is disqualified from being elected as, or being, a police and crime commissioner if the person—(a) is disqualified from being a member of the House of Commons under section 1(1)(d) of the House of Commons Disqualification Act 1975 (members of police forces for police areas in the United Kingdom);(b) is a member of—(i) the British Transport Police Force;(ii) the Civil Nuclear Constabulary;(c) is a special constable appointed—(i) under section 27 of the Police Act 1996 for a police area or the City of London police area;(ii) under section 25 of the Railways and Transport Safety Act 2003 (British Transport Police Force);(d) is a member of staff of the chief officer of police of any police force maintained for a police area;(e) is a member of staff of—(i) a police and crime commissioner;(ii) the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime;(f) is the Mayor of London;(g) is a member of the Common Council of the City of London or a member of staff of that Council in its capacity as a police authority;(h) is a member (including a member who is chairman or chief executive), or member of staff, of—(i) the British Transport Police Authority;(ii) the Civil Nuclear Police Authority;(iii) the [F53Independent Office for Police Conduct];(iv) the Serious Organised Crime Agency;F54(v) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .(i) holds any employment in an entity which is under the control of—(i) a local policing body;(ii) any body mentioned in paragraph (h);(i) 
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)	63Part 1 – Police reformCHAPTER 6 – Police and crime commissioners: elections and vacancies Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)(iii) the chief officer of police for any police force maintained for a police area or the City of London police area;(iv) the chief officer of police for any police force mentioned in paragraph (b).[F55(1A) Subsection (1)(e)(i) does not prevent a deputy police and crime commissioner—(a) from being elected as police and crime commissioner at an ordinary election of police and crime commissioners;(b) from being elected at an election held under section 51 to fill a vacancy in the office of police and crime commissioner if, on the day on which the person is nominated as a candidate at the election and at all times between that day and the declaration of the result of the election, the deputy is acting as police and crime commissioner under section 62.](2) In this section, “member of staff”, in relation to any person (“A”), includes a person (“B”) who works for A—(a) under a contract of employment,(b) under a contract for services, or(c) in accordance with arrangements made between B's employer and A;and for this purpose B works for A if B provides services for A under the direction and control of A.(3) In subsection (1)(i), the reference to an entity under the control of a local policing body or other body or a chief officer of police is to be construed in accordance with regulations made by the Secretary of State F56....(4) In its application in relation to the first election of a police and crime commissioner to be held for a police area, this section applies as if—(a) for paragraphs (d) to (g) of subsection (1) there were substituted—“(d) any member, or member of staff, of a police authority within the meaning of the Police Act 1996 (see section 101 of that Act);”, and(b) for paragraph (i)(i) of that subsection there were substituted—“(i) a police authority within the meaning of the Police Act 1996.”
64	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)Part 1 – Police reformCHAPTER 6 – Police and crime commissioners: elections and vacanciesDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)66 Disqualification from election or holding office as police and crime commissioner: other grounds(1) A person is disqualified from being elected as, or being, a police and crime commissioner unless the person satisfies the citizenship condition (see section 68).(2) A person is disqualified from being elected as, or being, a police and crime commissioner if the person—(a) is disqualified from being a member of the House of Commons under section 1(1)(a) to (c) of the House of Commons Disqualification Act 1975 (judges, civil servants, members of the armed forces), or(b) is a member of the legislature of any country or territory outside the United Kingdom.(3) A person is disqualified from being elected as, or being, a police and crime commissioner if—(a) the person is the subject of—(i) a debt relief restrictions order under paragraph 1 of Schedule 4ZB to the Insolvency Act 1986;(ii) an interim debt relief restrictions order under paragraph 5 of that Schedule;(iii) a bankruptcy restrictions order under paragraph 1 of Schedule 4A to that Act;(iv) a bankruptcy restrictions interim order under paragraph 5 of that Schedule;(b) a debt relief restrictions undertaking has effect in respect of the person under paragraph 7 of Schedule 4ZB to that Act;(c) the person has been convicted in the United Kingdom, the Channel Islands, or the Isle of Man, of any imprisonable offence (whether or not sentenced to a term of imprisonment in respect of the offence); F57...(d) the person is incapable of being elected as a member of the House of Commons, or is required to vacate a seat in the House of Commons, under Part 3 of the Representation of the People Act 1983 (consequences of corrupt or illegal practices)[F58; or(a) 
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)	65Part 1 – Police reformCHAPTER 6 – Police and crime commissioners: elections and vacancies Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)(e) the person is incapable of being elected to or holding the office of—(i) member of the Northern Ireland Assembly having been reported personally guilty or convicted of a corrupt practice under section 114A of the Representation of the People Act 1983 (as applied by Schedule 1 to the Northern Ireland Assembly (Elections) Order 2001 (S.I. 2001/2599)) (undue influence);(ii) member of a district council in Northern Ireland having been reported personally guilty or convicted of a corrupt practice under paragraph 3 of Schedule 9 to the Electoral Law Act (Northern Ireland) 1962 (undue influence).](4) For the purpose of subsection (3)(c)—(a) “imprisonable offence” means an offence—(i) for which a person who has attained the age of 18 years may be sentenced to a term of imprisonment, or(ii) for which, in the case of such a person, the sentence is fixed by law as life imprisonment;(b) a person is to be treated as having been convicted—(i) on the expiry of the ordinary period allowed for an appeal or application in respect of the conviction, or(ii) if an appeal or application is made in respect of the conviction, when the appeal or application is finally disposed of or abandoned or fails by reason of non-prosecution.(5) A person is disqualified from being elected as, or being, police and crime commissioner for a police area if the person—(a) is a member of staff of a relevant council, or(b) holds any employment in an entity which is under the control of a relevant council within subsection (7)(a), (b), (c) or (f).(6) For this purpose—“member of staff” has the same meaning as in section 65;  “relevant council”, in relation to a police area, means a council within subsection (7) for an area which, or any part of which, lies within the police area.(7) Those councils are—(a) a county council;(b) a county borough council;(c) a district council;(d) a parish council;(e) a community council;(f) the Council of the Isles of Scilly.(8) In subsection (5)(b), the reference to an entity under the control of a relevant council is to be construed in accordance with regulations made by the Secretary of State F59....(9) Nothing in subsection (5) is to be taken to disqualify a person by virtue of being a teacher, or otherwise employed, in a school or other educational institution maintained or assisted by a relevant council.(1) 
66	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)Part 1 – Police reformCHAPTER 6 – Police and crime commissioners: elections and vacanciesDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)[F60(10) Subsection (11) applies to the police and crime commissioner for a police area if, by virtue of an order under section 4A of the Fire and Rescue Services Act 2004, the person who is for the time being the commissioner for that area is also the fire rescue authority for an area which corresponds to or falls within the police area.(11) A person is disqualified from being elected as, or being, that police and crime commissioner if the person is employed by—(a) a fire and rescue authority within section 1(2) or (3) of the Fire and Rescue Services Act 2004,(b) a fire and rescue authority constituted by a scheme under section 2 of that Act or a scheme to which section 4 of that Act relates, or(c) a fire and rescue authority created by an order under section 4A of that Act.][F61(12) A person is disqualified from being elected as, or being, police and crime commissioner if the person—(a) is the London Fire Commissioner, or(b) is a member of the staff of the London Fire Commissioner.]67 Disqualification of person holding office as police and crime commissionerA person becomes disqualified from being a police and crime commissioner upon becoming a member of—(a) the House of Commons;(b) the Scottish Parliament;(a) 
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)	67Part 1 – Police reformCHAPTER 6 – Police and crime commissioners: elections and vacancies Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)(c) the National Assembly for Wales;(d) the Northern Ireland Assembly;(e) the European Parliament.68 Citizenship condition(1) This section applies for the purposes of section 66.(2) A person satisfies the citizenship condition if the person is—(a) a qualifying Commonwealth citizen,(b) a citizen of the Republic of Ireland, or(c) a [F62qualifying EU citizen or an EU citizen with retained rights].(3) For the purposes of this section, a person is a qualifying Commonwealth citizen if the person is a Commonwealth citizen and—(a) is not a person who requires leave under the Immigration Act 1971 to enter or remain in the United Kingdom, or(b) is a person who requires such leave but for the time being has (or is, by virtue of any enactment, to be treated as having) indefinite leave to remain within the meaning of that Act.(4) But a person who does not require leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom by virtue only of section 8 of the Immigration Act 1971 (exceptions to requirement for leave in special cases) is not a qualifying Commonwealth citizen by virtue of subsection (3)(a).F63(5) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)Part 1 – Police reformCHAPTER 6 – Police and crime commissioners: elections and vacanciesDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)69 Validity of actsThe acts of a person elected as police and crime commissioner for a police area under this Chapter who acts in that office are, despite any disqualification—(a) from being, or being elected as, a police and crime commissioner, or  (b) from being, or being elected as police and crime commissioner for that area, as valid and effectual as if the person had not been so disqualified.Elections: further provision70 Declaration of acceptance of office of police and crime commissioner(1) A person elected to the office of police and crime commissioner for any police area may not act in that office unless the person has—(a) made a declaration of acceptance of the office in a form specified in an order made by the Secretary of State F64..., and  (b) delivered the declaration to the appropriate officer, in each case, when not ineligible by virtue of subsection (5).(2) If the person fails to make and deliver a declaration in accordance with subsection (1) within the period of two months beginning with the day after the election, the office of police and crime commissioner for that area becomes vacant at the end of the period.(3) Any declaration made under this section must be made before—(a) the appropriate officer;(b) a justice of the peace or magistrate in the United Kingdom, the Channel Islands or the Isle of Man, or(c) a commissioner appointed to administer oaths in the Senior Courts.(4) Any person before whom a declaration is authorised to be made under this section may take the declaration.(5) A person is ineligible to make or give a declaration of acceptance of office under this section in respect of the office of police and crime commissioner for a police area at any time when the person is a member of—(a) the House of Commons;(b) the Scottish Parliament;(c) the National Assembly for Wales;(d) the Northern Ireland Assembly;(e) the European Parliament.(a) 
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)	69Part 1 – Police reformCHAPTER 6 – Police and crime commissioners: elections and vacancies Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)(6) No salary, and no payment towards the provision of superannuation benefits, is to be paid under this Act to or in respect of a police and crime commissioner until the commissioner has complied with the requirements of subsection (1).(7) Subsection (6) does not affect any entitlement of a police and crime commissioner to payments in respect of the period before the commissioner complies with the requirements of subsection (1) once the commissioner has complied with those requirements.71 Judicial proceedings as to disqualification or vacancy(1) Any person who claims that a person purporting to be a police and crime commissioner for a police area is, or at any time since being elected has been, disqualified—(a) from being a police and crime commissioner; or(b) from being police and crime commissioner for the police area,may apply to the High Court for a declaration to that effect, and that accordingly the office of police and crime commissioner for the area is vacant.(2) An application under subsection (1) in respect of any person may be made whether the grounds on which it is made are alleged to have subsisted at the time when the person was elected or to have arisen subsequently.(3) No declaration may be made under this section in respect of any person on grounds which subsisted when the person was elected, if an election petition under an order under section 58 is pending or has been tried in which the person's disqualification on those grounds is or was in issue.(4) Any person who claims that a person purporting to be a police and crime commissioner for a police area has ceased to be the police and crime commissioner for the police area by virtue of—(a) section 63, or(b) section 70,(a) 
70	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)Part 1 – Police reformCHAPTER 6 – Police and crime commissioners: elections and vacanciesDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)may apply to the High Court for a declaration to that effect.(5) On an application under this section—(a) the person in respect of whom the application is made is to be the respondent, and(b) the applicant must give such security for the costs of the proceedings as the court may direct.(6) The amount of the security may not exceed £5,000 or such other sum as the Secretary of State F65... may specify by order.(7) The decision of the court on an application under this section is final.72 Amendment of police areas: term of office of commissioner(1) Subsection (2) applies where a person becomes police and crime commissioner for a resulting police area by virtue of, or of an election required to be held by, a police area alteration order.(2) The person's term of office as police and crime commissioner ends at the time when it would end had the person been elected as police and crime commissioner at the previous ordinary election of commissioners in England or, as the case may be, Wales.(3) In this section—“police area alteration order” means—(a) an order under section 32 of the Police Act 1996 (power to alter police areas by order);(b) an order under section 10 of the Local Government and Public Involvement in Health Act 2007 (implementation of Boundary Committee for England review of local government areas) which alters the boundary of any police area in England;(c) [F66an order under section 45 of the [F67Democracy and Boundary Commission Cymru etc. Act 2013] (recommendations for changes to police areas) which alters the boundary of any police area in Wales;](a) 
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)	71Part 1 – Police reformCHAPTER 6 – Police and crime commissioners: elections and vacancies Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)  “resulting police area”, in relation to a police area alteration order, means a police area existing immediately after the order comes into force—(a) which is created by the order, or(b) any part of whose boundary results from the order.(4) References in this section to the coming into force of a police area alteration order are references to the changes in police areas made by the order taking effect.73 Computation of time and timing of elections etc(1) Subsection (2) applies where the day, or the last day, on which anything is required or permitted to be done by or under section 50, 51 or 70 is not a business day.(2) The requirement or permission is deemed to relate instead to the first business day after that day.(3) Where under subsection (2) the day of an election is postponed, the day to which it is postponed is to be treated as the day of election for the purpose of—(a) any provision of, or made under, this Act, or(b) any relevant provision (within the meaning of section 58).(4) Any day which is not a business day is to be disregarded in computing any period of time for the purpose of section 51.(5) In this section, “business day” means a day other than— a Saturday,a Sunday, Christmas Eve, Christmas Day, Good Friday,a bank holiday, ora day appointed for public thanksgiving or mourning.
72	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)Part 1 – Police reformCHAPTER 6 – Police and crime commissioners: elections and vacanciesDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)74 Elections: consequential amendmentsSchedule 10 (consequential amendments relating to elections of persons as police and crime commissioners) has effect.75 The appropriate officer(1) For each police area, other than the metropolitan police district, the Secretary of StateF68... must by order designate a local authority.(2) In this Chapter, the “appropriate officer”, [F69means—(a) in relation to a police area in England, the head of paid service of the local authority designated for that police area;(b) in relation to a police area in Wales, the chief executive of the local authority designated for that police area.](3) In this section—  [F70“chief executive” means the person appointed by a county council or county borough council in Wales under section 54 of the Local Government and Elections (Wales) Act 2021;]“local authority” means—(a) a district council,(b) a county council in England for a county in which there are no district councils,(c) the Council of the Isles of Scilly,(d) a county council or county borough council in Wales;  “head of paid service”, in relation to a council [F71in England], means the person designated by the council under section 4(1)(a) of the Local Government Act 1989.  
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)	73Part 1 – Police reformCHAPTER 6 – Police and crime commissioners: elections and vacancies Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)76 Interpretation of Chapter 6In this Chapter, the following terms have the following meanings, unless the context otherwise requires—“appropriate officer” has the meaning given by section 75; “elector”—(a) in relation to an election of a police and crime commissioner, means a person entitled to vote at the election;(b) in relation to a local government election, has the same meaning as in the Representation of the People Act 1983 (see section 202 of that Act);  “electoral area” has the same meaning as in that Act as it applies in relation to England and Wales (see section 203 of that Act);  “local government election” has the same meaning as in that Act as it applies in relation to England and Wales (see section 203 of that Act);  “local government elector” means a person registered as a local government elector in the register of electors in accordance with the provisions of the Representation of the People Acts;“ordinary election” has the meaning given in section 50;“police area returning officer” has the meaning given by section 54.
74	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)Part 1 – Police reformCHAPTER 7 – Other provisions relating to policing and crime and disorderDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)CHAPTER 7OTHER PROVISIONS RELATING TO POLICING AND CRIME AND DISORDERRequirement for national policing capabilities77 The strategic policing requirement(1) For section 37A of the Police Act 1996 (setting of strategic priorities for police authorities), substitute—“37A The strategic policing requirement(1) The Secretary of State must, from time to time, issue a document (the “strategic policing requirement”) which sets out what, in the Secretary of State's view, are—(a) national threats at the time the document is issued, and(b) appropriate national policing capabilities to counter those national threats.(2) A chief officer of police must, in exercising the functions of chief officer, have regard to the strategic policing requirement.(3) Before issuing the strategic policing requirement, the Secretary of State—(a) must obtain the advice of—(i) such persons as appear to the Secretary of State to represent the views of chief officers of police, and(ii) such persons as appear to the Secretary of State to represent the views of local policing bodies, and(b) must consult such other persons as the Secretary of State thinks fit.(4) The strategic policing requirement need not set out a national threat (in particular) if, in the Secretary of State's view, countering the threat would involve police forces other than England and Wales police forces (and only those other police forces).(5) References in this section to national policing capabilities to counter a threat are references to the ability of all England and Wales police forces—(a) to exercise one or more functions to counter that threat,(b) to exercise one or more functions in one or more particular ways to counter that threat, or(c) to exercise one or more functions in accordance with common operational standards to counter that threat.(6) In this section—“England and Wales police force” means—(a) a police force maintained under section 2,(b) the metropolitan police force, and(c) the City of London police force;  “national threat” means a threat (whether actual or prospective) which is—  
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)	75Part 1 – Police reformCHAPTER 7 – Other provisions relating to policing and crime and disorder Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)(a) a threat to national security, public safety, public order or public confidence that is of such gravity as to be of national importance, or(b) a threat which can be countered effectively or efficiently only by national policing capabilities to counter the threat.”.Duties and powers of Secretary of State78 General duty of Secretary of StateThe Secretary of State must exercise the powers conferred by this Part in such manner and to such extent as appears to the Secretary of State to be best calculated to promote the efficiency and effectiveness of the police.79 Policing protocol(1) The Secretary of State must issue a policing protocol.(2) Each relevant person must have regard to the policing protocol in exercising the person's functions.(3) The Secretary of State may at any time—(a) vary the policing protocol, or(b) replace the policing protocol.(4) Before varying or replacing the policing protocol, the Secretary of State must consult—(a) such persons as appear to the Secretary of State to represent the views of elected local policing bodies,(b) such persons as appear to the Secretary of State to represent the views of chief officers of police of police forces maintained by elected local policing bodies,(c) such persons as appear to the Secretary of State to represent the views of police and crime panels, and(d) such other persons as the Secretary of State thinks fit.(5) The functions of the Secretary of State under subsections (1) and (3) are exercisable by order.(6) In this section—“police and crime panel” means—(a) each police and crime panel established in accordance with Schedule 6 (police areas outside London);(a) 
76	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)Part 1 – Police reformCHAPTER 7 – Other provisions relating to policing and crime and disorderDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)(b) the London Assembly's police and crime panel (see section 32); “policing protocol” means a document which sets out, or otherwise makesprovision about, ways in which relevant persons should (in the Secretary ofState's view) exercise, or refrain from exercising, functions so as to—(a) encourage, maintain or improve working relationships (including co- operative working) between relevant persons, or(b) limit or prevent the overlapping or conflicting exercise of functions; “relevant persons” means—(a) the Secretary of State in the exercise of policing functions;(b) each elected local policing body;(c) the chief officer of each police force maintained by an elected local policing body;(d) police and crime panels.80 Obtaining advice from representative bodies(1) The Secretary of State may, in connection with the exercise by the Secretary of State of any function relating to the police or policing, require a representative body to give the Secretary of State advice on any matter.(2) A requirement under subsection (1) may specify the period within which the advice is to be given.(3) A representative body must comply with a requirement under subsection (1).(4) In a case where—(a) the Secretary of State makes such a request, and(b) the representative body gives the advice (and, where applicable, does so within the period specified),the Secretary of State must have regard to the advice in that exercise of that function.(5) In this section “representative body” means any body which appears to the Secretary of State to represent the professional views of members of one or more police forces.81 Abolition of certain powers of Secretary of StateIn the Police Act 1996, omit—(a) section 38 (performance targets for police strategic priorities);(b) section 39 (codes of practice for police authorities);(c) section 43 (reports from police authorities to Secretary of State).(a) 
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)	77Part 1 – Police reformCHAPTER 7 – Other provisions relating to policing and crime and disorder Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)82 Suspension and removal of senior police officers(1) The Police Act 1996 is amended as follows.(2) Section 42 (removal of chief constables etc) is amended in accordance with subsections (3) to (11).(3) For the title substitute “ Metropolitan police: suspension or removal of Commissioner or Deputy Commissioner ”.(4) For subsections (1) to (1B) substitute—“(1) The Secretary of State may require the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime to exercise the power under section 48 of the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (the “2011 Act”) to call upon the Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis, or the Deputy Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis, to retire or resign.(1A) The Secretary of State may also require the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime to exercise the power under section 48 of the 2011 Act to suspend the Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis, or the Deputy Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis, if the Secretary of State considers that it is necessary for the maintenance of public confidence in the metropolitan police force for that police officer to be suspended.”.(5) In subsection (2), for the words before paragraph (a) substitute—“(2) Before requiring the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime to exercise its power to call upon the Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis, or the Deputy Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis, to retire or resign, the Secretary of State shall—”.(6) In subsection (2A), for the words from “notice” (in the second place) to the end substitute “ notice to the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime. ”.(7) In subsection (3A)—(a) in paragraph (a), for the words from “, Deputy” to “question” substitute “ or Deputy Commissioner ”;(b) in paragraph (b), for the words from “Metropolitan” to “concerned” substitute “ Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime ”.(8) In subsection (3B), for the words from “, Deputy” to “question” substitute “ or Deputy Commissioner ”.(9) In subsection (4), for the words from “, the Deputy” to “constable” substitute “ or Deputy Commissioner ”.(10) For subsection (4A) substitute—(1) 
78	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)Part 1 – Police reformCHAPTER 7 – Other provisions relating to policing and crime and disorderDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)“(4A) If the Secretary of State exercises the power conferred by subsection (1) to require the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime to call upon the Commissioner to retire or resign—(a) the requirement of section 48(1) of the 2011 Act to obtain the Secretary of State's consent does not apply, and(b) section 48(5) of the 2011 Act does not apply.”.(11) Omit subsection (4C).(12) In section 50 (regulations for police forces), after subsection (2) insert—“(2A) Without prejudice to the generality of subsection (1) or (2), regulations under this section may make provision with respect to the procedures to be followed by police and crime commissioners, or the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime, in exercising—(a) powers of suspension, or(b) powers of removal,(whether, in the case of the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime, on their own initiative or in compliance with a requirement imposed by the Secretary of State).(2B) In subsection (2A)—“power of removal” means—(a) the power conferred on police and crime commissioners by section 38(3) of the 2011 Act to require chief constables to retire or resign;(b) the power conferred on the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime by section 48(3) of the 2011 Act to require the Commissioner or Deputy Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis to retire or resign;“power of suspension” means—(a) the power conferred on police and crime commissioners by section 38(2) of the 2011 Act to suspend chief constables;(b) the power conferred on the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime by section 48(1) of the 2011 Act to suspend the Commissioner or Deputy Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis;and for this purpose “2011 Act” means the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011.”.
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)	79Part 1 – Police reformCHAPTER 7 – Other provisions relating to policing and crime and disorder Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)Her Majesty's inspectors of constabulary83 Functions of HMIC(1) Section 54 of the Police Act 1996 (appointment and functions of inspectors of constabulary) is amended as follows.(2) In subsection (2) omit “to the Secretary of State”.(3) Omit subsection (2A).(4) After subsection (2B) insert—“(2BA) The local policing body for a police area may at any time request the inspectors of constabulary to carry out an inspection under this section of a police force maintained for that police area; and a request under this subsection may include a request for the inspection to be confined to a particular part of the force in question, to particular matters or to particular activities of that force.(2BB) Where a local policing body requests the inspectors to carry out an inspection under subsection (2BA), the body must pay to the inspectors such reasonable costs incurred or to be incurred in connection with the inspection as the inspectors may require.”.(5) Omit subsection (2C).(6) In subsection (4)—(a) for “in such form as the Secretary of State may direct” substitute “ on the carrying out of inspections under this section ”, and(b) for “Secretary of State” (in the third place) substitute “ chief inspector ”.(7) After subsection (4) insert—“(4A) A report under subsection (4) must include the chief inspector's assessment of the efficiency and effectiveness of policing in England and Wales for the year in respect of which the report is prepared.”.84 HMIC reports: publication(1) Section 55 of the Police Act 1996 (publication of reports) is amended as follows.(2) For subsection (1) substitute—“(1) The inspectors of constabulary must arrange for any report prepared under section 54 to be published in such manner as appears to the inspectors to be appropriate.”.(3) For subsection (2) substitute—“(2) But the inspectors of constabulary must exclude from publication under subsection (1) anything that the inspectors consider—
80	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)Part 1 – Police reformCHAPTER 7 – Other provisions relating to policing and crime and disorderDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)(a) would be against the interests of national security, or(b) might jeopardise the safety of any person.(2A) The inspectors must disclose to the Secretary of State anything excluded from publication by virtue of subsection (2).”.(4) For subsection (3) substitute—“(3) The inspectors of constabulary must send a copy of the published report to—(a) the Secretary of State,(b) the local policing body maintaining the police force to which the report relates,(c) the chief officer of police of that police force, and(d) any police and crime panel established under section 28 of the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 for the police area of that police force.”.(5) In subsection (4)—(a) for “police authority” substitute “ local policing body ”, and(b) for “authority” substitute “ body ”.(6) In subsection (5)—(a) for “police authority” substitute “ local policing body ”, and(b) in paragraph (c) and in the words following that paragraph, for “authority” substitute “ body ”.(7) In subsection (6) for “police authority” substitute “ local policing body ”.(8) Omit subsection (8).85 Inspection programmes and frameworks(1) Paragraph 2 of Schedule 4A to the Police Act 1996 (further provision about HMIC) is amended as follows.(2) In sub-paragraph (1) omit “, or at such times as the Secretary of State may specify by order,”.(3) In sub-paragraph (2) for “each of those persons or bodies” substitute “ the Secretary of State ”.(4) After sub-paragraph (2) insert—“(2A) The chief inspector of constabulary must—(a) lay before Parliament a copy of each inspection programme or inspection framework prepared under this paragraph,(b) arrange for each such programme or framework to be published in such manner as the chief inspector thinks appropriate, and(a) 
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)	81Part 1 – Police reformCHAPTER 7 – Other provisions relating to policing and crime and disorder Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)(c) send a copy of each such programme or framework to each of the persons or bodies listed in sub-paragraph (2)(a) to (j).(2B) But the chief inspector of constabulary must obtain the approval of the Secretary of State to the inspection programme or framework in question before acting under sub-paragraph (2A).”.(5) In sub-paragraph (3)—(a) before “to send” insert “ under sub-paragraph (2A)(c) ”, and(b) for “that sub-paragraph” substitute “ sub-paragraph (2) ”.(6) Omit sub-paragraph (4).(7) Before sub-paragraph (5) insert—“(4A) The Secretary of State may by order specify matters to which the chief inspector of constabulary must have regard in preparing an inspection programme or an inspection framework.(4B) Those matters may (in particular) include the need to secure, so far as possible, the following objectives—(a) that any requirements placed on police forces as a result of inspections carried out under section 54 are not unduly burdensome; and(b) that inspections under that section can be carried out promptly in response to matters that raise issues of national importance in relation to the police.(4C) For the purposes of sub-paragraph (4B)(b), the Secretary of State may issue guidance as to the matters that raise issues of national importance in relation to the police; and the chief inspector of constabulary must have regard to any such guidance in preparing an inspection programme or an inspection framework.”.F7286	Powers in connection with HMIC inspections. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .87 HMIC and freedom of informationIn Part 6 of Schedule 1 to the Freedom of Information Act 2000 (other public bodies and offices: general), at the appropriate place insert—“The chief inspector of constabulary appointed under section 54(1) of the Police Act 1996.”.
82	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)Part 1 – Police reformCHAPTER 7 – Other provisions relating to policing and crime and disorderDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)Community safety partnerships88 Crime and disorder strategiesSchedule 11 (which contains amendments to sections 5 to 7 of the Crime and Disorder Act 1998 in relation to the formulation and implementation of crime and disorder strategies) has effect.Policing in England and Wales89 Collaboration agreements(1) The Police Act 1996 is amended in accordance with subsections (2) and (3).(2) After section 22 insert—“22A Collaboration agreements(1) A collaboration agreement may be made by—(a) two or more policing bodies; or(b) the chief officers of police of one or more police forces and two or more policing bodies.(2) A collaboration agreement is an agreement containing one or more of the following—(a) provision about the discharge of functions of members of a police force (“force collaboration provision”);(b) provision about support by a policing body for another policing body (“policing body collaboration provision”);(c) provision about support by a policing body for the police force which another policing body is responsible for maintaining (“policing body & force collaboration provision”).(3) A collaboration agreement may not contain force collaboration provision unless the parties to the agreement consist of, or include,—(a) the chief officer of police of each police force to which the provision relates, and(b) the policing body that is responsible for maintaining each such police force.(a) 
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)	83Part 1 – Police reformCHAPTER 7 – Other provisions relating to policing and crime and disorder Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)(4) A collaboration agreement may not contain policing body collaboration provision unless the parties to the agreement consist of, or include, each policing body to which the provision relates.(5) A collaboration agreement may not contain policing body & force collaboration provision unless the parties to the agreement consist of, or include—(a) the policing body, or each policing body, to which the provision relates;(b) the chief officer of police of the police force, or each police force, to which the provision relates; and(c) the policing body that is responsible for maintaining each such police force.(6) Subsection (1) does not prevent other persons from being parties to collaboration agreements.(7) Subsection (2) does not prevent a collaboration agreement from including other kinds of provision.(8) For the purposes of subsections (3) and (5), the circumstances in which force collaboration provision, or policing body & force collaboration provision, is to be taken to relate to a police force include the cases where provision relates—(a) to functions of a kind which are or may be exercisable by members of that police force, or(b) to the police area for which that police force is established.(9) For the purposes of subsections (4) and (5), the circumstances in which policing body collaboration provision, or policing body & force collaboration provision, is to be taken to relate to a policing body include the cases where provision relates—(a) to functions of a kind which are or may be exercisable by that policing body or members of the staff of that body, or(b) to the police area for which that policing body is established.22B Duty of chief officers to keep collaboration agreements under review(1) The chief officer of police of a police force must keep under consideration the ways in which the collaboration functions could be exercised by the chief officer and by one or more other persons to improve the efficiency or effectiveness of—(a) that police force, and(b) one or more other police forces.(2) If the chief officer considers that there is a particular way in which the collaboration functions could be so exercised by the chief officer and by one or more other particular persons (“the proposed collaboration”), the chief officer must notify those other persons (the “proposed partners”) of the proposed collaboration.(3) The chief officer, and the proposed partners notified under subsection (2) (the “notified proposed partners”), must consider whether to exercise the collaboration functions to give effect to the proposed collaboration.(1) 
84	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)Part 1 – Police reformCHAPTER 7 – Other provisions relating to policing and crime and disorderDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)(4) In considering whether to so exercise the collaboration functions, the chief officer and the notified proposed partners must consider whether the proposed collaboration would be in the interests of the efficiency or effectiveness of one or more police forces.(5) Subsection (6) applies if all, or two or more, of—(a) the chief officer, and(b) the notified proposed partners,(the “agreeing parties”) are of the view that the proposed collaboration would be in the interests of the efficiency or effectiveness of one or more police forces (if the agreeing parties were to exercise the collaboration functions to give effect to the proposed collaboration, or to give effect to it so far as it relates to them).(6) The agreeing parties must exercise the collaboration functions so as to give effect to the proposed collaboration or to give effect to it so far as it relates to them.(7) In this section “collaboration functions” means functions of chief officers of police or policing bodies under any of sections 22A to 23I (apart from this section).22C Duty of policing bodies to keep collaboration agreements under review(1) A policing body must keep under consideration the ways in which the collaboration functions could be exercised by the policing body and by one or more other persons to improve—(a) the efficiency or effectiveness of—(i) that policing body,(ii) the police force which that policing body is responsible for maintaining, or(iii) that body and that force, and(b) the efficiency or effectiveness of one or more other policing bodies and police forces.(2) If the policing body considers that there is a particular way in which the collaboration functions could be so exercised by the policing body and by one or more other particular persons (“the proposed collaboration”), the policing body must notify those other persons (the “proposed partners”) of the proposed collaboration.(3) The policing body, and the proposed partners notified under subsection (2) (the “notified proposed partners”), must consider whether to exercise the collaboration functions to give effect to the proposed collaboration.(4) In considering whether to so exercise the collaboration functions, the policing body and the notified proposed partners must consider whether the proposed collaboration would be in the interests of the efficiency or effectiveness of one or more policing bodies or police forces.(5) Subsection (6) applies if all, or two or more, of—(a) the policing body, and(a) 
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)	85Part 1 – Police reformCHAPTER 7 – Other provisions relating to policing and crime and disorder Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)(b) the notified proposed partners,(the “agreeing parties”) are of the view that the proposed collaboration would be in the interests of the efficiency or effectiveness of one or more policing bodies or police forces (if the agreeing parties were to exercise the collaboration functions to give effect to the proposed collaboration, or to give effect to it so far as it relates to them).(6) The agreeing parties must exercise the collaboration functions so as to give effect to the proposed collaboration, or to give effect to it so far as it relates to them.(7) In this section “collaboration functions” means functions of policing bodies or chief officers of police under any of sections 22A to 23I (apart from this section).”.(3) After section 23F insert—“23FA Police functions that must be the subject of force collaboration provision(1) The Secretary of State may, by order, require a specified police function to be exercised in relation to—(a) all police areas, or  (b) all police areas apart from any specified in the order, in accordance with police collaboration provision.(2) An order under this section may specify whether the specified police function is required to be exercised in relation to the specified police areas in accordance with police collaboration provision contained in—(a) a single collaboration agreement which relates to all of those police areas, or(b) a number of collaboration agreements which, between them, relate to all of those police areas.(3) Provision under subsection (2)(b) need not specify a particular number of collaboration agreements.(4) A statutory instrument containing an order under this section may not be made unless a draft of the instrument has been laid before, and approved by a resolution of, each House of Parliament.(5) If, but for this subsection, an instrument containing an order under this section would be treated for the purposes of the standing orders of either House of Parliament as a hybrid instrument, it is to proceed in that House as if it were not a hybrid instrument.(6) In this section “specified” means specified in an order under this section.”.(4) Schedule 12 (collaboration agreements) has effect.
86	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)Part 1 – Police reformCHAPTER 7 – Other provisions relating to policing and crime and disorderDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)90 Police powers for civilian employees under collaboration agreementsSchedule 13 (police powers for civilian employees under collaboration agreements) has effect.91 Power to give directions(1) The Police Act 1996 is amended as follows.(2) In section 40 (powers to give directions in relation to police force), for “police authority” (in each place) substitute “ local policing body ”.(3) In section 40A (powers to give directions in relation to police authority)—(a) for “police authority” (in each place, including in the title) substitute “ local policing body ”;(b) for “the authority” substitute “ the local policing body ”.(4) In section 40B (procedure for directions under section 40 or 40A)—(a) for subsection (2)(a) substitute—“(a)	such persons as appear to the Secretary of State to represent the views of police and crime commissioners;(aa)	the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime; (ab)	the Common Council;”;(b) in subsection (5), for “police authority” substitute “ local policing body ”.92 Provision of information by chief officers of policeIn the Police Act 1996, for section 44 (reports from chief constables) and section 45 (criminal statistics) substitute—“44 Provision of information by chief officers of police(1) The Secretary of State may require a chief officer of police of any police force to provide the Secretary of State with information on such matters as may be specified in the requirement, being matters connected with—(a) the policing of the police area for which that police force is maintained, or(b) the discharge of the national or international functions of that police force.(2) A requirement under subsection (1) may, in particular, specify information in the form of statistical data, being data connected with—(a) the policing of that police area, or(a) 
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)	87Part 1 – Police reformCHAPTER 7 – Other provisions relating to policing and crime and disorder Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)(b) the discharge of the national or international functions of the police force for that area.(3) A requirement under subsection (1) may specify the form in which information is to be provided.(4) The Secretary of State may require a chief officer to publish, in such manner as appears to the Secretary of State to be appropriate, information provided in accordance with a requirement under subsection (1).(5) The Secretary of State may cause a consolidated and classified abstract of any information in the form of statistical data that is provided in accordance with subsection (1) to be prepared and laid before Parliament.”.93 Regulations about provision of equipment(1) Section 53 of the Police Act 1996 (regulations as to standard of equipment) is amended as follows.(2) In the title, after “standard” insert “ and provision ”.(3) After subsection (1A) insert—“(1AA) The Secretary of State may, by regulations, make provision about the arrangements which must be, may be, or must not be, used for the provision of equipment for use for police purposes.(1AB) The regulations may, in particular—(a) make provision about the nature or terms of such arrangements, or(b) prescribe arrangements which may be, or must be, used.”(4) In subsection (1B), after “subsection (1A)” insert “ or (1AA) ”.(5) In subsection (2), for paragraph (a) substitute—“(a)	such persons as appear to the Secretary of State to represent the views of police and crime commissioners;(aa)	the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime; (ab)	the Common Council;”.94 National and international functions(1) Section 96A of the Police Act 1996 (national and international functions of the metropolitan police) is amended in accordance with subsections (2) to (6).(2) In the title, after “police” insert “ force and other police forces ”.(1) 
88	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)Part 1 – Police reformCHAPTER 8 – Miscellaneous provisions Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)(3) For subsection (1) substitute—“(1) The Secretary of State and the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime may enter into agreements with respect to the level of performance to be achieved by the metropolitan police force in respect of any of its national or international functions.(1A) The Secretary of State and the police and crime commissioner that maintains a police force may enter into agreements with respect to the level of performance to be achieved by the police force in respect of any of its national or international functions.(1B) The Secretary of State and the Common Council may enter into agreements with respect to the level of performance to be achieved by the City of London police force in respect of any of its national or international functions.”.(4) In subsection (2)—(a) for “the metropolitan police force” substitute “ a police force ”;(b) for “Metropolitan Police Authority” substitute “ local policing body ”.(5) In subsection (3), for “The Metropolitan Police Authority” substitute “ A local policing body ”.(6) Omit subsection (4).(7) Omit section 96B of the Police Act 1996 (national and international functions: application of requirements relating to reports etc).Police: complaints95 Police: complaintsSchedule 14 (police: complaints) has effect.CHAPTER 8MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS96 Interpretation of Police Act 1996(1) Section 101 of the Police Act 1996 (interpretation) is amended as follows.(1) 
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)	89Part 1 – Police reformCHAPTER 8 – Miscellaneous provisions Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)(2) In subsection (1)—(a) after the definition of “City of London police area” insert—““Common Council” means the Common Council of the City of London in its capacity as police authority for the City of London police area;“elected local policing body” means—(a) a police and crime commissioner;(b) the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime;“local policing body” means—(a) a police and crime commissioner (in relation to a police area listed in Schedule 1);(b) the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime (in relation to the metropolitan police district);(c) the Common Council (in relation to the City of London police area);“Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime” means the body established under section 3 of the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011;”;(b) after the definition of “metropolitan police district” insert—““national or international functions” means functions relating to—(a) the protection of prominent persons or their residences,(b) national security,(c) counter-terrorism, or(d) the provision of services for any other national or international purpose;“police and crime commissioner” means a body established under section 1 of the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011;”;(c) omit the definition of “police authority”;(d) in the definition of “police force”, for “police authority” substitute “ local policing body ”;(e) in the definition of “police fund”, for paragraph (a) substitute—“(a) in relation to a police area for which there is an elected local policing body, the fund kept by that body under section 21 of the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011;”.(3) After subsection (2) insert—“(3) References in this Act to the staff of a police and crime commissioner, or to the staff of the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime, have the same meaning as in the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011.”.
90	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)Part 1 – Police reformCHAPTER 8 – Miscellaneous provisions Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)97 Amendments of the Interpretation Act 1978(1) Schedule 1 to the Interpretation Act 1978 (words and expressions defined) is amended as follows.(2) After the entry for “Local land charges register” insert—““Local policing body” has the meaning given by section 101(1) of the Police Act 1996.”.(3) After the entry for “Person” insert—““Police and crime commissioner” means a police and crime commissioner established under section 1 of the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011.”.(4) In the entry that begins “Police area”, omit “, police authority”.(5) After the entry that begins “Police Area” insert—““Police authority”, in relation to Scotland, has the meaning or effect described by sections 50 and 51(4) of the Police (Scotland) Act 1967.”.98 Police reform: transitional provisionSchedule 15 (police reform: transitional provision) has effect.99 Police reform: minor and consequential amendmentsSchedule 16 (police reform: minor and consequential amendments) has effect.100 GuidanceAny guidance under this Part—(a) must be in writing;(b) may be varied or revoked by further guidance;(a) 
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)	91Part 1 – Police reformCHAPTER 8 – Miscellaneous provisions Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)(c) may be given to one or more particular persons, or generally;(d) may make provision generally or in relation to specific cases; and(e) may make different provision for different cases.101 Crime and disorder reduction(1) A reference to crime and disorder reduction is a reference to—(a) reduction of crime and disorder (including anti-social and other behaviour adversely affecting the local environment),(b) combating the misuse of drugs, alcohol and other substances, and(c) reduction of re-offending.(2) In this section “anti-social behaviour” means behaviour by a person which causes or is likely to cause harassment, alarm or distress to one or more other persons not of the same household as the person.(3) This section applies for the purposes of this Part.102 Interpretation of Part 1(1) In this Part (unless otherwise specified)—“chief executive” means—(a) in relation to a police and crime commissioner, the chief executive appointed by the commissioner under Schedule 1;(b) in relation to the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime, the chief executive appointed by the Office under Schedule 3;“chief finance officer” means—(a) in relation to a police and crime commissioner, the chief finance officer appointed by the commissioner under Schedule 1;(b) in relation to the chief constable of a police force to which Chapter 1 applies, the chief finance officer appointed by the chief constable under Schedule 2;(c) in relation to the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime, the chief finance officer appointed by the Office under Schedule 3;(d) in relation to the Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis, the chief finance officer appointed by the Commissioner under Schedule 4;“chief officer of police” means—(a) in relation to a police force maintained under section 2 of the Police Act 1996, the chief constable of that force;(b) in relation to the metropolitan police force, the Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis;(a) 
92	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)Part 1 – Police reformCHAPTER 8 – Miscellaneous provisions Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)“crime and disorder reduction” has the meaning given in section 101; “elected local policing body” means—(a) in relation to a police area listed in Schedule 1 to the Police Act 1996, the police and crime commissioner for the area;(b) in relation to the metropolitan police district, the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime;“national or international functions” means functions relating to—(a) the protection of prominent persons or their residences,(b) national security,(c) counter-terrorism, or(d) the provision of services for any other national or international purpose;  [F73“overseas elector’s declaration” means a declaration made under and in accordance with section 1C of the Representation of the People Act 1985.]“police and crime panel” means—(a) in relation to a police area listed in Schedule 1 to the Police Act 1996, the police and crime panel referred to in subsection (1) of section 28;(b) in relation to the metropolitan police district, the committee established under section 32;“police and crime plan” has the meaning given in section 7; “police area” means—(a) a police area listed in Schedule 1 to the Police Act 1996 (police areas outside London), and(b) the metropolitan police district;  [F74“qualifying EU citizen” and “EU citizen with retained rights” have the same meaning as in the Representation of the People Act 1983 (see sections 203A and 203B of that Act);]“relevant chief officer of police”, in relation to—(a) a police area,(b) the police force for a police area,(c) the elected local policing body for a police area, or(d) the police and crime panel for a police area,means the chief officer of police of the police force for that area;F75...“relevant elected local policing body”, in relation to—(a) a police area,(b) the police force for a police area,(c) the chief officer of police of the police force for a police area, or(d) the police and crime panel for a police area,means the elected local policing body for that area; “relevant police and crime panel”, in relation to—(a) a police area,(b) the police force for a police area,(c) the chief officer of police of the police force for a police area, or(d) the elected local policing body for a police area, means the police and crime panel for that area;(a) 
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)	93Part 1 – Police reformCHAPTER 8 – Miscellaneous provisions Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)“relevant police force”, in relation to—(a) a police area,(b) a chief officer of police of the police force for a police area,(c) the elected local policing body for a police area, or(d) the police and crime panel for a police area, means the police force for that area.(2) References in this Part to a police and crime commissioner's area are references to the police area for which the commissioner is established.(3) References in this Part to a police and crime commissioner's staff are references to the following persons appointed under Schedule 1—(a) the commissioner's chief executive;(b) the commissioner's chief finance officer; and(c) other staff;and to the person (if any) appointed as the deputy police and crime commissioner under section 18.(4) References in this Part to a police force's civilian staff are (except in the case of the metropolitan police force) references to—(a) the chief finance officer appointed by the chief constable of the force under paragraph 4 of Schedule 2, and(b) the other staff appointed by that chief constable under that Schedule.(5) References in this Part to the staff of the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime are references to—(a) the Office's chief finance officer appointed under section 127(2) of the Greater London Authority Act 1999;(b) the Office's chief executive appointed under Schedule 3;(c) other staff appointed under Schedule 3; and(d) the person (if any) appointed under section 19 as the Deputy Mayor for Policing and Crime (subject to paragraph 4(4) of Schedule 3 (Deputy Mayor an Assembly member)).(6) References in this Part to the metropolitan police force's civilian staff are references to—(a) the chief finance officer appointed by the Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis under paragraph 1 of Schedule 4, and(b) the other staff appointed by the Commissioner under that Schedule.
94	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)Part 2 – LicensingCHAPTER 1 – Amendments of the Licensing Act 2003Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)PART 2LICENSINGCHAPTER 1AMENDMENTS OF THE LICENSING ACT 2003Responsible authorities103 Licensing authorities as responsible authorities(1) The Licensing Act 2003 is amended as set out in subsections (2) and (3).(2) In section 13(4) (responsible authorities)—(a) before paragraph (a) insert—“(za)	the relevant licensing authority and any other licensing authority in whose area part of the premises is situated,”, and(b) omit paragraph (g).(3) In section 69(4) (responsible authorities)—(a) before paragraph (a) insert—“(za)	the relevant licensing authority and any other licensing authority in whose area part of the premises is situated,”, and(b) omit paragraph (g).(4) The amendments made by this section apply in relation to—(a) applications relating to premises licences or club premises certificates that are made on or after the commencement of this section, and(b) notices under section 165(4) of the Licensing Act 2003 (closure orders) that are received by a licensing authority on or after the commencement of this section.
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)	95Part 2 – LicensingCHAPTER 1 – Amendments of the Licensing Act 2003 Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)104 Primary Care Trusts and Local Health Boards as responsible authorities(1) The Licensing Act 2003 is amended as set out in subsections (2) to (4).(2) In section 5(3) (statement of licensing policy), after paragraph (b) insert—“(ba)	each Primary Care Trust or Local Health Board for an area any part of which is in the licensing authority's area,”.(3) In section 13(4) (authorised persons, interested parties and responsible authorities), after paragraph (b) insert—“(ba)	the Primary Care Trust or Local Health Board for any area in which the premises are situated,”.(4) In section 69(4) (authorised persons, interested parties and responsible authorities), after paragraph (b) insert—“(ba)	the Primary Care Trust or Local Health Board for any area in which the premises are situated,”.(5) The amendments made by this section apply in relation to—(a) applications relating to premises licences or club premises certificates that are made on or after the commencement of this section, and(b) notices under section 165(4) of the Licensing Act 2003 (closure orders) that are received by a licensing authority on or after that commencement.Removing the vicinity test105 Premises licences: who may make relevant representations(1) The Licensing Act 2003 is amended as set out in subsections (2) to (9).(2) In section 13 (authorised persons, interested parties and responsible authorities)—(a) in the title, omit “, interested parties”,(b) in subsection (1), omit “ “interested party”,”, and(c) omit subsection (3).(3) In section 17(5) (application for premises licence)—(a) in paragraph (a)(ii), for “interested parties” substitute “ persons who live, or are involved in a business, in the relevant licensing authority's area and who are ”,(b) after paragraph (a) insert—“(aa) require the relevant licensing authority to advertise the application within the prescribed period—(i) in the prescribed form, and(ii) in a manner which is prescribed and is likely to bring the application to the attention of the persons who are likely to be affected by it; and”, and”(i) 
96	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)Part 2 – LicensingCHAPTER 1 – Amendments of the Licensing Act 2003Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)(c) in paragraph (c), for “interested parties and responsible authorities” substitute “ responsible authorities and other persons ”.(4) In section 18(7) (determination of application for premises licence)—(a) in paragraph (a), for “an interested party or responsible authority” substitute “ a responsible authority or other person ”, and(b) in paragraph (c), for “an interested party (who is not also a responsible authority)” substitute “ a person who is not a responsible authority ”.(5) In section 31(6) (determination of application for provisional statement)—(a) in paragraph (a), for “an interested party or responsible authority” substitute “ a responsible authority or other person ”, and(b) in paragraph (c), for “an interested party (who is not also a responsible authority)” substitute “ a person who is not a responsible authority ”.(6) In section 35(6) (determination of application to vary premises licence)—(a) in paragraph (a), for “an interested party or responsible authority” substitute “ a responsible authority or other person ”, and(b) in paragraph (c), for “an interested party (who is not also a responsible authority)” substitute “ a person who is not a responsible authority ”.(7) In section 41B(2)(b)(ii) (determination of application for minor variation of premises licence), for “an interested party” substitute “ any other person ”.(8) In section 41D(6) (variation of premises licence: supply of alcohol from community premises), for paragraph (b) substitute—“(b)	subsection (6)(c) were omitted.”.(9) In section 194 (index of defined expressions), omit the entry for the expression “interested party, in Part 3”.(10) In section 33 of the Policing and Crime Act 2009 (individual members of licensing authorities to be interested parties), omit subsection (1).(11) The amendments made by this section apply in relation to applications relating to premises licences that are made on or after the commencement of this section.106 Premises licences: who may apply for review(1) The Licensing Act 2003 is amended as set out in subsections (2) to (6).(2) In section 51 (application for review of premises licences)—(a) in subsection (1), for “an interested party or a responsible authority” substitute “ a responsible authority or any other person ”, and(b) in subsection (3)—(i) in paragraph (b), for “interested parties and responsible authorities” substitute “ responsible authorities and other persons ”, and(i) 
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)	97Part 2 – LicensingCHAPTER 1 – Amendments of the Licensing Act 2003 Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)(ii) in paragraph (c), for “interested party” substitute “ other person ”.(3) In section 52(8) (determination of application for review of premises licence)—(a) in paragraph (a)(i), for “an interested party” substitute “ any other person ”, and(b) in paragraph (c), for “an interested party (who is not also a responsible authority)” substitute “ a person who is not a responsible authority ”.(4) In section 53A(3) (summary reviews on application of senior police officer)—(a) in paragraph (c), for “interested parties” substitute “ other persons ”, and(b) in paragraph (e), for “interested party” substitute “ other person ”.(5) In section 53C(8) (review of premises licence following summary review notice)—(a) in paragraph (a), for “an interested party” substitute “ any other person ”, and(b) in paragraph (c), for “an interested party (who is not also a responsible authority)” substitute “ a person who is not a responsible authority ”.(6) In section 167 (review of premises licence following closure order)—(a) in subsection (4)(b), for “interested parties” substitute “ other persons ”,(b) in subsection (4)(c), for “interested party” substitute “ other person ”,(c) in subsection (10)(a), for “an interested party” substitute “ any other person ”,(d) in subsection (10)(c), for “an interested party (who is not also a responsible authority)” substitute “ a person who is not a responsible authority ”, and(e) in subsection (14), for “ “interested party” and “responsible authority” have” substitute “ “responsible authority” has”.(7) The amendments made by this section apply in relation to applications for review that are made on or after the commencement of this section.107 Club premises certificates: who may make relevant representations(1) The Licensing Act 2003 is amended as set out in subsections (2) to (7).(2) In section 69 (authorised persons, interested parties and responsible authorities)—(a) in the title, omit “, interested parties”,(b) in subsection (1), omit “ “interested party”,”, and(c) omit subsection (3).(3) In section 71(6) (application for club premises certificate)—(a) in paragraph (a)(ii), for “interested parties” substitute “ persons who live, or are involved in a business, in the relevant licensing authority's area and who are ”,(b) after paragraph (a) insert—“(aa) require the relevant licensing authority to advertise the application within the prescribed period—
98	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)Part 2 – LicensingCHAPTER 1 – Amendments of the Licensing Act 2003Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)(i) in the prescribed form, and(ii) in a manner which is prescribed and is likely to bring the application to the attention of the persons who are likely to be affected by it; and”, and”(c) in paragraph (c), for “interested parties and responsible authorities” substitute “ responsible authorities and other persons ”.(4) In section 72(8) (determination of application for club premises certificate)—(a) in paragraph (a), for “an interested party or responsible authority” substitute “ a responsible authority or other person ”, and(b) in paragraph (c), for “an interested party (who is not also a responsible authority)” substitute “ a person who is not a responsible authority ”.(5) In section 85(6) (determination of application to vary club premises certificate)—(a) in paragraph (a), for “an interested party or responsible authority” substitute “ a responsible authority or other person ”, and(b) in paragraph (c), for “an interested party (who is not also a responsible authority)” substitute “ a person who is not a responsible authority ”.(6) In section 86B(2)(b)(ii) (determination of application for minor variation of club premises certificate), for “an interested party” substitute “ any other person ”.(7) In section 194 (index of defined expressions), omit the entry for the expression “interested party, in Part 4”.(8) In section 33 of the Policing and Crime Act 2009 (individual members of licensing authorities to be interested parties), omit subsection (2).(9) The amendments made by this section apply in relation to applications relating to club premises certificates that are made on or after the commencement of this section.108 Club premises certificates: who may apply for review(1) The Licensing Act 2003 is amended as set out in subsections (2) to (4).(2) In section 87 (application for review of club premises certificate), for subsection (1) substitute—“(1) Where a club holds a club premises certificate, a responsible authority or any other person may apply to the relevant licensing authority for a review of the certificate.”.(3) In section 87(3) (application for review of club premises certificate)—(a) in paragraph (b), after “to the authority” insert “ by the club, responsible authorities and other persons ”, and(b) in paragraph (c), for “interested party” substitute “ other person ”.(a) 
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)	99Part 2 – LicensingCHAPTER 1 – Amendments of the Licensing Act 2003 Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)(4) In section 88(8) (determination of application for review of club premises certificate)—(a) in paragraph (a), for “an interested party” substitute “ any other person ”, and(b) in paragraph (c), for “an interested party (who is not also a responsible authority)” substitute “ a person who is not a responsible authority ”.(5) The amendments made by this section apply in relation to applications for review that are made on or after the commencement of this section.Reducing the evidential burden on licensing authorities109 Reducing the burden: premises licences(1) The Licensing Act 2003 is amended as set out in subsections (2) to (14).(2) In section 18 (determination of application for premises licence)—(a) in subsection (3)(b), for “necessary” substitute “ appropriate ”, and(b) in subsection (4)(a)(i), for “necessary” substitute “ appropriate ”.(3) In section 22(2) (prohibited conditions: plays), for “necessary” substitute “ appropriate ”.(4) In section 25A(6) (grant of premises licence: supply of alcohol from community premises), for “necessary” substitute “ appropriate ”.(5) In section 31 (determination of application for provisional statement)—(a) in subsection (3)(b), for “necessary” substitute “ appropriate ”, and(b) in subsection (3)(c)(ii), for “necessary” substitute “ appropriate ”.(6) In section 35(3)(b) (determination of application to vary premises licence), for “necessary” substitute “ appropriate ”.(7) In section 39(3)(b) (determination of application to vary premises licence to specify premises supervisor), for “necessary” substitute “ appropriate ”.(8) In section 41D(5) (variation of premises licence: supply of alcohol from community premises), for “necessary” substitute “ appropriate ”.F76(9) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .F77(10) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .(11) In section 52(3) (determination of application for review of premises licence), for “necessary” substitute “ appropriate ”.(12) In section 53B(8)(a) (supplementary provision about review of premises licence), for “necessary” substitute “ appropriate ”.(11) 
100	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)Part 2 – LicensingCHAPTER 1 – Amendments of the Licensing Act 2003Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)(13) In section 53C(2)(b) (review of premises licence following review notice), for “necessary” substitute “ appropriate ”.(14) In section 177(5) (dancing and live music in certain small premises), for “necessary” substitute “ appropriate ”.(15) The amendments made by this section (other than subsection (10)) apply in relation to applications relating to premises licences that are made on or after the commencement of this section.(16) The amendment made by subsection (10) of this section applies in relation to interim authority notices that are given on or after the commencement of this section.110 Reducing the burden: club premises certificates(1) The Licensing Act 2003 is amended as set out in subsections (2) to (5).(2) In section 72 (determination of application for club premises certificate)—(a) in subsection (3)(b), for “necessary” substitute “ appropriate ”, and(b) in subsection (4)(a)(i), for “necessary” substitute “ appropriate ”.(3) In section 76(2) (prohibited conditions: plays), for “necessary” substitute “ appropriate ”.(4) In section 85(3)(b) (determination of application to vary club premises certificate), for “necessary” substitute “ appropriate ”.(5) In section 88(3) (determination of application for review of club premises certificate), for “necessary” substitute “ appropriate ”.(6) The amendments made by this section apply in relation to applications relating to club premises certificates that are made on or after the commencement of this section.111 Reducing the burden: other situations(1) The Licensing Act 2003 is amended as set out in subsections (2) to (6).(2) In section 105(2)(b) (counter notice following police objection), for “necessary” substitute “ appropriate ”.(1) 
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13) Part 2 – LicensingCHAPTER 1 – Amendments of the Licensing Act 2003 Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)
101
F78(3) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .F79(4) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .F80(5) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .(6) In section 167(5)(b) (review of premises licence following closure order), for “necessary” substitute “ appropriate ”.(7) The amendment made by subsection (2) of this section applies in relation to temporary event notices that are given on or after the commencement of this section.(8) The amendments made by subsections (3) to (5) of this section apply in relation to applications relating to personal licences that are made on or after the commencement of this section.(9) The amendment made by subsection (6) of this section applies in relation to notices under section 165(4) of the Licensing Act 2003 (closure orders) that are received by a licensing authority on or after the commencement of this section.Temporary event notices112 Temporary event notices: who may make an objection(1) The Licensing Act 2003 is amended as set out in subsections (2) to (13).(2) After section 99, insert—“99A Meaning of “relevant person”In this Part references to a “relevant person”, in relation to any premises, are references to the following—(a) the chief officer of police for any police area in which the premises are situated,(b) the local authority by which statutory functions are exercisable in any area in which the premises are situated in relation to minimising or preventing the risk of pollution of the environment or of harm to human health.”.(3) In the cross-heading before section 104, for “Police objections” substitute “ Objections ”.(1) 
102	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)Part 2 – LicensingCHAPTER 1 – Amendments of the Licensing Act 2003Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)(4) In the title to section 104 (objection to notice), for “the police” substitute “ a relevant person ”.(5) In section 104 (objection to notice), for subsection (2) substitute—“(2) Where a relevant person who is given a temporary event notice is satisfied that allowing the premises to be used in accordance with the notice would undermine a licensing objective, the relevant person must give a notice stating the reasons for being so satisfied (an “objection notice”)—(a) to the relevant licensing authority,(b) to the premises user, and(c) to every other relevant person.”.(6) In section 104(3) (timing for objection), for “chief officer of police” substitute “ relevant person ”.(7) In section 104(4) (timing for objection), for “relevant chief officer of police” substitute “ relevant person ”.(8) Omit section 104(5) (definition of “relevant chief officer of police”).(9) In section 105 (counter notice following objection)—(a) in the title, omit “police”,(b) in subsection (2)(a), for “chief officer of police” substitute “ relevant person ”,(c) in subsection (2)(b), for “the crime prevention objective” substitute “ a licensing objective ”,(d) in subsection (3)(a), for “the relevant chief officer of police” substitute “ each relevant person ”, and(e) in subsection (3)(b)(ii), for “the relevant chief officer of police” substitute “ each relevant person ”.(10) In section 106 (modification of notice following objection)—(a) in the title, omit “police”,(b) in subsection (1), for “chief officer of police” substitute “ relevant person ”,(c) in subsection (2)—(i) for “chief officer of police” substitute “ relevant person ”, and(ii) after “of the premises user” insert “ and each other relevant person ”,(d) in subsection (4), for “chief officer of police” substitute “ relevant person ”, and(e) omit subsection (5).(11) In section 107(11) (counter notice where permitted limits exceeded), for the words following “that notice” substitute “ to each relevant person ”.(12) In section 194 (index of defined expressions), after the entry for the expression “relevant offence” insert—“relevant person, in Part 5	section 99A”.(13) In Schedule 5 (appeals)—(a) in paragraph 16(1)(b), for “chief officer of police” substitute “ relevant person ”,(a) 
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13) Part 2 – LicensingCHAPTER 1 – Amendments of the Licensing Act 2003 Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)
103
(b) in paragraph 16(3), for “chief officer of police” substitute “ relevant person ”,(c) in paragraph 16(8), in the definition of “objection notice”, omit “and”,(d) in paragraph 16(8), at the end of the definition of “relevant licensing authority” insert “; andrelevant person” has the meaning given in section 99A.”.(14) The amendments made by this section apply in relation to temporary event notices that are given on or after the commencement of this section.113 Temporary event notices: conditions(1) The Licensing Act 2003 is amended as set out in subsections (2) to (5).(2) In section 98(1) (meaning of “permitted temporary activity”), for paragraph (a) substitute—“(a)	it is carried out in accordance with—(i) a notice given in accordance with section 100, and(ii) any conditions imposed under section 106A, and”.(3) After section 106 insert—“106A Conditions on standard temporary event notice following objection(1) This section applies where—(a) a relevant person has given an objection notice under section 104(2) in respect of a standard temporary event notice,(b) the objection notice has not been withdrawn, and(c) the relevant licensing authority has decided under section 105 not to give a counter notice under that section.(2) The relevant licensing authority may impose one or more conditions on the standard temporary event notice if—(a) the authority considers it appropriate for the promotion of the licensing objectives to do so,(b) the conditions are also imposed on a premises licence or club premises certificate that has effect in respect of the same premises, or any part of the same premises, as the temporary event notice, and(c) the conditions would not be inconsistent with the carrying out of the licensable activities under the temporary event notice.(3) Where the authority decides to impose one or more conditions under subsection (2)—(a) the authority must give the premises user notice of the decision,(a) 
104	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)Part 2 – LicensingCHAPTER 1 – Amendments of the Licensing Act 2003Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)(b) the notice must be accompanied by a separate statement (the “statement of conditions”) which sets out the conditions that have been imposed on the temporary event notice, and(c) a copy of the notice and statement of conditions must be given to each relevant party.(4) The notice and statement of conditions under subsection (3) must—(a) be in the prescribed form,(b) be given to the premises user in the prescribed manner, and(c) be given no later than 24 hours before the beginning of the event period specified in the temporary event notice.(5) Where the premises are situated in the area of more than one licensing authority, the functions conferred on the relevant licensing authority by subsection (2) must be exercised by those authorities jointly.”.(4) In section 109 (duty to keep and produce temporary event notice)—(a) in the title, after “notice” insert “ and statement of conditions ”,(b) in subsection (2)(a), after “notice” insert “ , together with a copy of any statement of conditions given under section 106A(3) in respect of the notice ”,(c) in subsection (3)(a), after “notice” insert “ , together with a copy of any statement of conditions given under section 106A(3) in respect of the notice ”,(d) in subsection (3)(b), for “notice is” substitute “ notice and any statement of conditions are ”,(e) in subsection (5)(a), after “notice” insert “ or any statement of conditions ”,(f) in subsection (5), after “produce the temporary event notice” insert “ or statement of conditions ”,(g) in subsection (6), after “produce the temporary event notice” insert “ or statement of conditions ”, and(h) in subsection (8), after “notice” insert “ or statement of conditions ”.(5) In section 110 (theft, loss, etc. of temporary event notice)—(a) in the title, after “notice” insert “ or statement of conditions ”,(b) after subsection (1) insert—“(1A) Where a statement of conditions that is given under section 106A(3) is lost, stolen, damaged or destroyed, the premises user may apply to the licensing authority which gave the statement for a copy of the statement.”,(c) in subsection (4), after “copy of the notice” insert “ or statement ”,(d) in subsection (4)(a), after “notice” insert “ or statement ”,(e) in subsection (5), after “notice” insert “ or statement ”, and(f) in subsection (6), after “notice” insert “ or statement ”.(6) The amendments made by this section apply in relation to temporary event notices that are given on or after the commencement of this section.
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13) Part 2 – LicensingCHAPTER 1 – Amendments of the Licensing Act 2003 Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)
105
114 Temporary event notices: late notices(1) The Licensing Act 2003 is amended as set out in subsections (2) to (12).(2) In section 98(2) (meaning of “permitted temporary activity”), for “sections 102 (acknowledgement of notice) and 104(1) (notification of police)” substitute “ section 102 (acknowledgement of notice) ”.(3) In section 100 (temporary event notice)—(a) in subsection (7), for paragraph (a) substitute—“(a)	must be given in accordance with section 100A, and”, and”(b) in subsection (7)(b), after “fee” insert “ when it is given by the premises user to the relevant licensing authority. ”.(4) After section 100 insert—“100A Standard and late temporary event notices(1) For the purposes of section 100(7)(a), a temporary event notice must be given in accordance with—(a) subsection (2), in which case the notice is a “standard temporary event notice”, or(b) subsection (3), in which case the notice is a “late temporary event notice”.(2) A temporary event notice is given in accordance with this subsection if, no later than ten working days before the day on which the event period begins,—(a) it is given to the relevant licensing authority by means of a relevant electronic facility, or(b) it is given to the relevant licensing authority (otherwise than by means of a relevant electronic facility) and to each relevant person.(3) A temporary event notice is given in accordance with this subsection if—(a) it is given to the relevant licensing authority by means of a relevant electronic facility no later than five working days, but no earlier than nine working days, before the day the event period begins, or(b) both of the following are satisfied—(i) it is given to the relevant licensing authority (otherwise than by means of a relevant electronic facility) and to each relevant person no later than five working days before the day on which the event period begins;(ii) it is given to at least one of those persons no earlier than nine working days before the day on which that event period begins.(4) Where a temporary event notice (the “original notice”) is given by the premises user to the relevant licensing authority by means of a relevant electronic facility as referred to in subsection (2)(a) or (3)(a)—(1) 
106	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)Part 2 – LicensingCHAPTER 1 – Amendments of the Licensing Act 2003Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)(a) the licensing authority must give a copy of the original notice to each relevant person no later than the end of the first working day after the day on which the original notice was given to the authority, and(b) for the purposes of this Act, the copy is to be treated as if it were the original notice.(5) In this section “event period” in relation to a temporary event notice means the event period specified in the notice.”.(5) In section 102 (acknowledgement of notice), for subsection (3) substitute—“(3) Subsection (1) does not apply where, before the time by which acknowledgement of the receipt of the notice must be given in accordance with that subsection, a counter notice has been given to the premises user under—(a) where the counter notice is in respect of a late temporary event notice, section 104A, or(b) where the counter notice is in respect of a standard temporary event notice or a late temporary event notice, section 107.”.(6) In section 104 (objection to notice)—(a) omit subsections (1) and (1A), and(b) in subsection (3), for “a copy of the temporary event notice under subsection (1) or (1A)” substitute “ the temporary event notice ”.(7) After section 104 insert—“104A Counter notice following objection to late notice(1) Where an objection notice is given under section 104(2) in respect of a late temporary event notice, the relevant licensing authority must give the premises user a counter notice under this section.(2) The counter notice must—(a) be in the prescribed form, and(b) be given to the premises user in the prescribed manner.(3) The relevant licensing authority must, no later than 24 hours before the beginning of the event period specified in the temporary event notice—(a) give the counter notice to the premises user, and(b) give a copy of the counter notice to each relevant person.”.(8) In section 105 (counter notice following objection)—(a) in the title, after “objection” insert “ to standard temporary event notice ”,(b) in subsection (1), for “in respect of a” substitute “ under section 104(2) in respect of a standard ”, and(c) omit subsection (7).(9) In section 106(1) (modification of notice following objection)—(a) in the title, for “notice” substitute “ standard temporary event notice ”,(b) in subsection (1), for “in respect of a” substitute “ under section 104(2) in respect of a standard ”, and(a) 
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13) Part 2 – LicensingCHAPTER 1 – Amendments of the Licensing Act 2003 Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)
107
(c) in subsection (2), for “the notice returned to the premises user under section 102” substitute “ it ”.(10) In section 107 (counter notice where permitted limits exceeded)—(a) in subsection (2), for paragraph (b) substitute— “(b)	has already given at least—(i) 50 temporary event notices, or(ii) ten late temporary event notices,in respect of event periods wholly or partly within the same year as the event period specified in notice A.”, and”(b) in subsection (3), for paragraph (b) substitute— “(b)	has already given at least—(i) five temporary event notices, or(ii) two late temporary event notices,in respect of event periods wholly or partly within the same year as the event period specified in notice A.”.(11) In section 194 (index of defined expressions)—(a) after the entry for the expression “late night refreshment” insert—“late temporary event notice	section 100A(1)(b)”, and(b) after the entry for the expression “secretary, in Part 4” insert—“standard temporary event notice	section 100A(1)(a)”.(12) In paragraph 16(1)(a) of Schedule 5 (appeals), after “a” insert “ standard ”.(13) The amendments made by this section apply in relation to temporary event notices that are given on or after the commencement of this section.115 Relaxation of time limits applying to temporary event notices(1) The Licensing Act 2003 is amended as set out in subsections (2) and (3).(2) In section 100 (temporary event notice)—(a) in subsection (1), for “96 hours” substitute “ 168 hours ”, and(b) in subsection (5)(b), for “96 hours” substitute “ 168 hours ”.(3) In section 107(5) (counter notice where permitted limits exceeded), for “15 days” substitute “ 21 days ”.(4) The amendments made by this section apply in relation to temporary event notices that are given on or after the commencement of this section.(2) 
108	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)Part 2 – LicensingCHAPTER 1 – Amendments of the Licensing Act 2003Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)116 Temporary event notices: acknowledgment of notice(1) In section 102 of the Licensing Act 2003 (acknowledgement of notice)—(a) in subsection (1), for “(in duplicate) in accordance with this Part, it must acknowledge receipt of the notice by sending or delivering one notice” substitute “ in accordance with this Part, it must give written acknowledgement of the receipt of the notice ”, and(b) omit subsection (2).(2) The amendments made by this section apply in relation to temporary event notices that are given on or after the commencement of this section.117 Temporary event notice: time for objection to notice(1) In section 104(3) of the Licensing Act 2003 (objection to temporary event notice by police), for “second” substitute “ third ”.(2) The amendment made by this section applies in relation to temporary event notices that are given on or after the commencement of this section.Underage sales118 Persistently selling alcohol to children(1) The Licensing Act 2003 is amended as set out in subsections (2) and (3).F81(2) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .(3) In section 169A (closure notice for persistently selling alcohol to children)—(a) in subsection (2)(a), for “for a period not exceeding 48 hours” substitute “ , for the period specified in the notice, ”, and(b) in subsection (4), for “not more than 48 hours” substitute “ at least 48 hours but not more than 336 hours ”.(4) The amendment made by subsection (2) of this section applies in relation to offences that are committed on or after the commencement of that subsection.(1) 
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13) Part 2 – LicensingCHAPTER 1 – Amendments of the Licensing Act 2003 Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)
109
(5) The amendments made by subsection (3) of this section apply in relation to closure notices that are given on or after the commencement of that subsection in relation to offences committed before, on or after that commencement.Early morning alcohol restriction orders119 Early morning alcohol restriction orders(1) The Licensing Act 2003 is amended as set out in subsections (2) and (3).(2) In section 7 (exercise and delegation of functions), in subsection (2), after paragraph (a) (but before the final “or”) insert—“(aa)	the functions of making, and varying or revoking, an order under section 172A (early morning alcohol restriction order),”.(3) For sections 172A to 172E (early morning alcohol restriction order), as inserted by section 55 of the Crime and Security Act 2010, substitute—“172A Power to make early morning alcohol restriction order(1) If a licensing authority considers it appropriate for the promotion of the licensing objectives, it may, subject as follows, make an order under this section.(2) An order under this section is an order providing that—(a) premises licences and club premises certificates granted by the authority, and temporary event notices given to the authority, do not have effect to the extent that they authorise the sale of alcohol during the period specified in the order, and(b) club premises certificates granted by the authority do not have effect to the extent that they authorise the supply of alcohol by or on behalf of a club to, or to the order of, a member of the club during the period specified in the order.(3) For the purposes of subsection (2)(a) and (b), the period that may be specified in the order must—(a) begin no earlier than midnight, and(b) end no later than 6am.(a) 
110	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)Part 2 – LicensingCHAPTER 1 – Amendments of the Licensing Act 2003Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)(4) It is immaterial for the purposes of an order under this section whether a premises licence or club premises certificate is granted, or a temporary event notice is given, before or after the order is made.(5) An order under this section may provide that it is to apply—(a) in relation to the same period of every day on which the order is to apply, or in relation to different periods of different days,(b) every day or only on particular days (for example, particular days of the week or year),(c) in relation to the whole or part of a licensing authority's area, or(d) for a limited or unlimited period.(6) An order under this section must specify—(a) the days on which it is to apply and the period of those days,(b) the area in relation to which it is to apply,(c) if it is to apply for a limited period, that period, and(d) the date from which it is to apply.(7) An order under this section must—(a) be in the prescribed form, and(b) have the prescribed content.172B Procedural requirements for early morning alcohol restriction order(1) A licensing authority proposing to make an order under section 172A must—(a) advertise the proposed order in the prescribed manner, and(b) hold a hearing to consider any relevant representations, unless the authority and each person who has made such representations agree that a hearing is unnecessary.(2) In this section “relevant representations” means representations which—(a) are about the likely effect of the making of the proposed order on the promotion of the licensing objectives,(b) are made to the licensing authority by an affected person, a responsible authority or any other person,(c) are made in the prescribed form and manner and within the prescribed period,(d) have not been withdrawn, and(e) in the case of representations made by a person who is not a responsible authority, are not, in the opinion of the licensing authority, frivolous or vexatious.(3) In subsection (2)(b), “affected person” means—(a) the holder of the premises licence or club premises certificate in respect of affected premises,(b) the premises user in relation to a temporary event notice in respect of affected premises,(a) 
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13) Part 2 – LicensingCHAPTER 1 – Amendments of the Licensing Act 2003 Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)
111
(c) a person who has applied for a premises licence or club premises certificate in respect of affected premises (where the application has not been determined), and(d) a person to whom a provisional statement has been issued in respect of affected premises.(4) In subsection (2)(b) and (e), “responsible authority” means—(a) the licensing authority and any other licensing authority in whose area part of any affected premises is situated,(b) the chief officer of police for a police area any part of which is in the area specified in the order,(c) the fire and rescue authority for an area any part of which is in the area specified in the order,(d) the Primary Care Trust or Local Health Board for an area any part of which is in the area specified in the order,(e) the local weights and measures authority for any such area,(f) the enforcing authority within the meaning given by section 18 of the Health and Safety at Work etc Act 1974 for any such area,(g) the local planning authority within the meaning given by the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 for any such area,(h) the local authority by which statutory functions are exercisable in the area specified in the order in relation to minimising or preventing the risk of pollution of the environment or of harm to human health,(i) a body which—(i) represents those who, in relation to the area specified in the order, are responsible for, or interested in, matters relating to the protection of children from harm, and(ii) is recognised by the licensing authority for the purposes of this section as being competent to advise on such matters,(j) where affected premises are a vessel—(i) a navigation authority (within the meaning given by section 221(1) of the Water Resources Act 1991) having functions in relation to the waters where the vessel is usually moored or berthed or any waters where it is navigated at a time when it is used for licensable activities to which the proposed order relates,(ii) the Environment Agency,(iii) [F82Canal & River Trust] , and(iv) the Secretary of State, and(k) a prescribed person.(5) Where a licensing authority determines for the purposes of subsection (2)(e) that any representations are frivolous or vexatious, it must notify the person who made them of its reasons for its determination.(6) In this section—  “affected premises”, in relation to a proposed order, means premises in respect of which it applies from the date specified in it;  “statutory function” means a function conferred by or under an enactment.  
112	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)Part 2 – LicensingCHAPTER 1 – Amendments of the Licensing Act 2003Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)172C Making of early morning alcohol restriction order(1) A licensing authority may not make an order under section 172A applying in relation to—(a) an area not specified in the proposed order advertised under section 172B,(b) a day not specified in that proposed order, or(c) a period other than the period specified in that proposed order of any day so specified.(2) After making an order under section 172A a licensing authority must publish it or otherwise make it available—(a) in the prescribed form and manner, and(b) within the prescribed period.172D Variation and revocation of early morning alcohol restriction order(1) A licensing authority may vary or revoke an order under section 172A.(2) Sections 172B and 172C apply in relation to the variation or revocation of an order under section 172A as in relation to the making of such an order.172E Exceptions from effect of early morning alcohol restriction order(1) An order under section 172A does not apply in prescribed cases or circumstances.(2) The cases referred to in subsection (1) may in particular be defined by reference to—(a) particular kinds of premises, or(b) particular days.(3) An order under section 172A is subject to an order under section 172 (whether made before or afterwards), unless and to the extent that the order under section 172 provides otherwise.”.(4) Section 55 of the Crime and Security Act 2010 (power to restrict sale and supply of alcohol) is repealed.
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13) Part 2 – LicensingCHAPTER 1 – Amendments of the Licensing Act 2003 Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)Fees
113
120 Suspension of licence or certificate for failing to pay annual fee(1) The Licensing Act 2003 is amended as set out in subsections (2) to (5).(2) In section 26(2) (period of validity of premises licence), after “section 52” insert “ or 55A ”.(3) After section 55 (annual fee for premises licence) insert—“55A Suspension of premises licence for failing to pay annual fee(1) A licensing authority must suspend a premises licence if the holder of the licence has failed to pay the authority an annual fee that has become due under section 55(2).(2) Subsection (1) does not apply if—(a) either—(i) the holder's failure to pay the fee at the time it became due was because of an administrative error (whether made by the holder, the authority or anyone else), or(ii) before or at the time the fee became due, the holder notified the authority in writing that the holder disputed liability for, or the amount of, the fee, and(b) the grace period for payment of the fee has not expired (see subsection (8)).(3) If a licensing authority suspends a premises licence under subsection (1), the authority must give the holder of the licence a notice to that effect, specifying the day the suspension takes effect.(4) A day specified in a notice under subsection (3) must be at least two working days after the day the authority gives the notice.(5) If the holder of the licence pays the annual fee, the licensing authority must give the holder written acknowledgement of receipt of the fee.(6) The acknowledgement of receipt under subsection (5) must—(a) specify the day the authority received the fee (the “receipt day”), and(b) be given to the holder as soon as is reasonably practicable but in any event—(i) if the receipt day was a working day, before the end of the first working day after the receipt day,(ii) otherwise, before the end of the second working day after the receipt day.(7) A suspension of a premises licence under subsection (1)—(a) takes effect on the day specified in the notice under subsection (3), and(b) ceases to have effect on the receipt day, as specified in the acknowledgement of receipt under subsection (5).(a) 
114	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)Part 2 – LicensingCHAPTER 1 – Amendments of the Licensing Act 2003Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)(8) In this section, the “grace period” for payment of a fee is the period of 21 days, beginning on the day after the day the fee became due.”.(4) In section 80(2) (period of validity of club premises certificate), after “section 88” insert “ or 92A ”.(5) After section 92 (annual fee for club premises certificate) insert—“92A Suspension of club premises certificate for failing to pay annual fee(1) A licensing authority must suspend a club premises certificate if the holder of the certificate has failed to pay the authority an annual fee that has become due under section 92(2).(2) Subsection (1) does not apply if—(a) either—(i) the holder's failure to pay the fee at the time it became due was because of an administrative error (whether made by the holder, the authority or anyone else), or(ii) before or at the time the fee became due, the holder notified the authority in writing that the holder disputed liability for, or the amount of, the fee, and(b) the grace period for payment of the fee has not expired (see subsection (8)).(3) If a licensing authority suspends a club premises certificate under subsection (1), the authority must give the holder of the certificate a notice to that effect, specifying the day the suspension takes effect.(4) A day specified in a notice under subsection (3) must be at least 2 working days after the day the authority gives the notice.(5) If the holder of the certificate pays the annual fee, the licensing authority must give the holder written acknowledgement of receipt of the fee.(6) The acknowledgement of receipt under subsection (5) must—(a) specify the day the authority received the fee (the “receipt day”), and(b) be given to the holder as soon as is reasonably practicable but in any event—(i) if the receipt day was a working day, before the end of the first working day after the receipt day,(ii) otherwise, before the end of the second working day after the receipt day.(7) A suspension of a club premises certificate under subsection (1)—(a) takes effect on the day specified in the notice under subsection (3), and(b) ceases to have effect on the receipt day, as specified in the acknowledgement of receipt under subsection (5).(8) In this section, the “grace period” for payment of a fee is the period of 21 days, beginning on the day after the day the fee became due.”.(2) 
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13) Part 2 – LicensingCHAPTER 1 – Amendments of the Licensing Act 2003 Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)
115
(6) The amendments made by this section apply in relation to premises licences and club premises certificates in relation to which annual fees become due on or after the commencement of this section.PROSPECTIVE121 Power for licensing authorities to set fees(1) The Licensing Act 2003 is amended as follows.(2) After section 197 insert—“197A Regulations about fees(1) Subsection (2) applies where the Secretary of State makes regulations under this Act prescribing the amount of any fee.(2) The Secretary of State may, in determining the amount of the fee, have regard, in particular, to—(a) the costs of any licensing authority to whom the fee is to be payable which are referable to the discharge of the function to which the fee relates, and(b) the general costs of any such licensing authority;and may determine an amount by reference to fees payable to, and costs of, any such licensing authorities, taken together.(3) A power under this Act to prescribe the amount of a fee includes power to provide that the amount of the fee is to be determined by the licensing authority to whom it is to be payable.(4) Regulations which so provide may also specify constraints on the licensing authority's power to determine the amount of the fee.(5) Subsections (6) and (7)—(a) apply where, by virtue of subsection (3), regulations provide that the amount of a fee is to be determined by a licensing authority, and(b) are subject to any constraint imposed under subsection (4).(6) The licensing authority—(a) must determine the amount of the fee (and may from time to time determine a revised amount),(b) may determine different amounts for different classes of case specified in the regulations (but may not otherwise determine different amounts for different cases), and(c) must publish the amount of the fee as determined from time to time.(a) 
116	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)Part 2 – LicensingCHAPTER 1 – Amendments of the Licensing Act 2003Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)(7) In determining the amount of the fee, the licensing authority must seek to secure that the income from fees of that kind will equate, as nearly as possible, to the aggregate of—(a) the licensing authority's costs referable to the discharge of the function to which the fee relates, and(b) a reasonable share of the licensing authority's general costs;and must assess income and costs for this purpose in such manner as it considers appropriate.197B Regulations about fees: supplementary provision(1) Subsections (2) and (3) apply for the purposes of section 197A.(2) References to a licensing authority's costs referable to the discharge of a function include, in particular—(a) administrative costs of the licensing authority so far as they are referable to the discharge of the function, and(b) costs in connection with the discharge of the function which are incurred by the licensing authority acting—(i) under this Act, but(ii) in a capacity other than that of licensing authority (whether that of local authority, local planning authority or any other authority).(3) References to the general costs of a licensing authority are to costs of the authority so far as they are referable to the discharge of functions under this Act in respect of which no fee is otherwise chargeable and include, in particular—(a) costs referable to the authority's functions under section 5;(b) costs of or incurred in connection with the monitoring and enforcement of Parts 7 and 8 of this Act;(c) costs incurred in exercising functions conferred by virtue of section 197A.(4) To the extent that they prescribe the amount of a fee or include provision made by virtue of section 197A(3) or (4), regulations may—(a) make provision which applies generally or only to specified authorities or descriptions of authority, and(b) make different provision for different authorities or descriptions of authority.(5) Subsection (4) is not to be taken to limit the generality of section 197.”.(3) In section 10(4) (sub-delegation of functions by licensing committee etc)—(a) omit “or” at the end of paragraph (c), and(b) after paragraph (d) insert “or(e)	any function conferred by virtue of section 197A (regulations about fees).”.
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13) Part 2 – LicensingCHAPTER 1 – Amendments of the Licensing Act 2003 Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)Miscellaneous
117
122 Licensing policy statements(1) Section 5 of the Licensing Act 2003 (statement of licensing policy) is amended as set out in subsections (2) to (7).(2) In subsection (1)—(a) for “three” substitute “ five ”, and(b) in paragraph (b) omit “(a “licensing statement”)”.(3) Omit subsection (2).(4) In subsection (3), for “three” substitute “ five ”.(5) In subsection (4)—(a) for “three” substitute “ five ”, and(b) after “policy” insert “ in respect of that period ”.(6) After subsection (6) insert—“(6A) Without prejudice to subsection (4), a licensing authority may replace its policy in respect of a period, with effect from any date during that period, by—(a) determining its policy with respect to the exercise of its licensing functions in respect of a period of five years beginning with that date, and(b) publishing a statement of that policy before that date.(6B) Subsection (3) applies in relation to any determination under subsection (6A) as it applies in relation to a determination under subsection (1).(6C) A licensing statement must specify the five year period to which it relates.”(7) After subsection (7) insert— “(8) In this section—“five year period”, in relation to a licensing authority, means—(a) if paragraph (b) does not apply, the period of five years ending with 6 January 2016, and each subsequent period of five years, or(b) if a licensing authority has published a licensing statement under subsection (6A), the period of five years to which the most recently published such statement relates, and each subsequent period of five years;  “licensing statement” means a statement published under subsection (1)(b) or (6A)(b).”(8) Any policy determined, and any licensing policy statement published, under section 5(1) of the Licensing Act 2003 in respect of the period of three years beginning with 7 January 2011 is, on and after the commencement of this subsection, to be treated for all purposes as if—(a) it had been determined and published under that section (as amended by this section) in respect of the period of five years beginning with 7 January 2011, and(a) 
118	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)Part 2 – LicensingCHAPTER 1 – Amendments of the Licensing Act 2003Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)(b) it specified the five year period to which it relates.123 Personal licences: relevant offences(1) Schedule 4 to the Licensing Act 2003 (personal licence: relevant offences) is amended as set out in subsections (2) to (4).(2) In paragraph 14 (offences under the Road Traffic Act 1988), after paragraph (c) insert—“(d)	section 6(6) (failing to co-operate with a preliminary test).”.(3) The second paragraph 22 is renumbered as paragraph 22A.(4) After paragraph 23 insert—“24	An offence under section 1 of the Criminal Attempts Act 1981 of attempting to commit an offence that is a relevant offence.25 An offence under section 1 of the Criminal Law Act 1977 of conspiracy to commit an offence that is a relevant offence.26 The offence at common law of conspiracy to defraud.”.(5) The amendments made by this section apply on and after the commencement of this section in relation to—(a) personal licences that are granted or renewed before, on or after the commencement of this section, and(b) offences committed before, on or after that commencement.Review124 Review of effect of amendments on licensing scheme(1) As soon as reasonably practicable after the end of the review period, the Secretary of State must—(a) carry out a review of the following provisions of this Chapter—(i) section 103 (licensing authorities as responsible authorities),(ii) section 104 (Primary Care Trusts and Local Health Boards as responsible authorities),(i) 
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13) Part 2 – LicensingCHAPTER 2 – Late night levy Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)
119
(iii) section	105	(premises	licences:	who	may	make	relevant representations),(iv) section 106 (premises licenses: who may apply for review),(v) section 107 (club premises certificates: who may make relevant representations),(vi) section 108 (club premises certificates: who may apply for review),(vii) section 109 (reducing the burden: premises licences),(viii) section 110 (reducing the burden: club premises certificates),(ix) section 111 (reducing the burden: other situations),(x) section 112 (temporary event notices: who may make an objection),(xi) section 113 (temporary event notices: conditions),(xii) section 117 (temporary event notice: time for objection to notice),(xiii) section 119 (early morning alcohol restriction orders),(xiv) section 120 (suspension of licence or certificate for failing to pay annual fee),(xv) section 123 (personal licences: relevant offences), and(b) set out the conclusions of the review in a report.(2) In particular, the review must assess the effect of the amendments made by those sections on the scheme established by the Licensing Act 2003.(3) The Secretary of State must lay a copy of the report before Parliament.(4) In this section, “review period” means the period of five years beginning with—(a) if all of those sections commence on the same day, that day, and(b) otherwise, the first day on which all of those sections have commenced.CHAPTER 2LATE NIGHT LEVYApplication of late night levy requirement in licensing authority's area125 Late night levy requirement[F83(1) In this Chapter, “a late night levy requirement” means a requirement to pay a late night levy in accordance with this Chapter.(2) A licensing authority may decide that a late night levy requirement is to apply in its area or in a part of its area in respect of—(a) relevant late night alcohol authorisations relating to premises in the area or the part, or(b) relevant late night alcohol authorisations and relevant late night refreshment authorisations relating to premises in the area or the part.(a) 
120	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)Part 2 – Licensing   CHAPTER 2 – Late night levy Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)(2A) Accordingly, references in this Chapter to a late night authorisation to which a late night levy requirement relates are references to any relevant late night alcohol authorisation or relevant late night refreshment authorisation in respect of which the late night levy requirement applies.(2B) A licensing authority may decide under subsection (2) that different late night levy requirements are to apply in different parts of its area.](3) In making a decision under subsection (2) a licensing authority must consider—(a) the costs of policing and other arrangements for the reduction or prevention of crime and disorder, in connection with the supply of alcohol [F84or late night refreshment] between midnight and 6 am, and(b) having regard to those costs, the desirability of raising revenue to be applied in accordance with section 131.F85(4) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .(5) This section is subject to section 132.Liability to pay late night levy126 “Relevant late night authorisation” and related definitions(1) This section applies for the purposes of this Chapter.(2) [F86“Relevant late night alcohol authorisation”], in relation to a licensing authority[F87, a late night levy requirement] and a levy year, means a premises licence or club premises certificate which—(a) is granted by the authority, and(b) authorises the supply of alcohol at a time or times during the late night supply period on one or more days in the related payment year [F88(whether or not it also authorises the provision of late night refreshment at a time or times during such a period)].[F89(2A) “Relevant late night refreshment authorisation”, in relation to a licensing authority, a late night levy requirement and a levy year, means a premises licence which—(a) is granted by the authority,(b) authorises the provision of late night refreshment at a time or times during the late night supply period on one or more days in the related payment year, and(a) 
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13) Part 2 – LicensingCHAPTER 2 – Late night levy Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)
121
(c) does not also authorise the supply of alcohol at a time or times during any such period.](3) The “late night supply period” in relation to a licensing authority means the period of the day decided by the authority under section 132 or 133.[F90(3A) Where a licensing authority decides under section 125(2) to apply a late night levy requirement in respect of both relevant late night alcohol authorisations and relevant late night refreshment authorisations, the licensing authority may determine under section 132(1)—(a) a single late night levy period that is to apply in respect of both kinds of authorisations, or(b) two late night levy periods, one of which is to apply in respect of relevant late night alcohol authorisations and the other of which is to apply in respect of relevant late night refreshment authorisations.](4) A late night supply period must—(a) begin at or after midnight, and(b) end at or before 6 am.(5) [F91A late night supply period] determined by a licensing authority for a levy year must be the same—(a) for each payment year beginning during the levy year, and(b) throughout each such payment year.(6) Regulations must make provision as to how payment years are to be determined in relation to holders of premises licences or club premises certificates.(7) Regulations under subsection (6) may, in particular—(a) provide for a holder's payment year to be determined by reference to the period in respect of which the holder is liable to pay an annual fee under section 55(2) or 92(2) of the Licensing Act 2003, or(b) confer functions or a discretion on licensing authorities in relation to premises licences and club premises certificates granted by them.(8) Regulations under subsection (6) which provide for licensing authorities to determine payment years must require an authority to decide how the payment years are to be determined at the time the authority decides under section 125(2) that [F92a late night levy requirement] is to apply F93....(9) For the purposes of this section, a payment year is related to a levy year if it begins at the same time as, or during, the levy year.
122	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)Part 2 – Licensing   CHAPTER 2 – Late night levy Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)127 Liability to pay late night levy(1) Where [F94a late night levy requirement] applies in the area [F95or part of the area] of a licensing authority, the holder of [F96a late night authorisation to which the requirement relates] must pay a levy (“the late night levy”) to the authority in respect of that authorisation for each levy year, in accordance with this Chapter.(2) But a holder of [F97a late night authorisation to which the requirement relates] who falls within an applicable exemption category is not liable to pay the late night levy in respect of that authorisation for the levy year.[F98(2A) In addition, if the requirement relates to a late night authorisation that is a relevant late night refreshment authorisation, the holder of the authorisation is not liable to pay the late night levy for a levy year if only hot drinks are supplied (or held out for supply) in reliance on the authorisation during the levy year.](3) For this purpose, “applicable exemption category”, in relation to a levy year, means a permitted exemption category that the licensing authority has decided under section 132 or 133 is to apply [F99in relation to the late night levy requirement] for the levy year.
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13) Part 2 – LicensingCHAPTER 2 – Late night levy Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)
123
128 Amount of late night levy(1) For [F100any levy requirement and] any levy year, the amount of the levy is—(a) the amount prescribed by regulations, or(b) the amount calculated in accordance with regulations.(2) But in the case of the holder of [F101a late night authorisation to which a late night levy requirement relates] who falls within an applicable reduction category, the amount of the late night levy payable in respect of the authorisation is the reduced amount that applies in relation to that category (see section 135(4)).(3) For this purpose “applicable reduction category”, in relation to [F102a late night levy requirement and] a levy year, means a permitted reduction category that the licensing authority has decided under section 132 or 133 is to apply [F103in relation to the late night levy requirement] for the levy year.(4) Subject to subsection (2), regulations under subsection (1) must provide for the amount of [F104a late night levy], or the manner in which it is to be calculated, to be the same[F105, in respect of all late night levy requirements] for all persons liable to pay [F106a levy] in respect of an authorisation F107....
124	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)Part 2 – Licensing   CHAPTER 2 – Late night levy Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)Administration of late night levy129 Payment and administration of the levy(1) Regulations—(a) must make provision as to collection and administration, and  (b) may make provision as to enforcement, of [F108a late night levy].(2) Regulations under subsection (1) must make provision as to the time or times for payment of [F109a levy] to a licensing authority by holders of [F110a late night authorisation to which a late night levy requirement relates].(3) Provision made by virtue of subsection (2) may in particular provide for any such time or times to be determined by reference to the holders' payment years.(4) Regulations under subsection (1) may make provision for adjustments to be made in cases where—(a) [F111a late night authorisation to which a late night levy requirement relates] ceases to be such an authorisation during the holder's payment year;(b) a premises licence or club premises certificate becomes [F112a late night authorisation to which a late night levy requirement relates] during the holder's payment year;(c) an order under section 172A of that Act (early morning restriction orders) precludes the supply of alcohol by virtue of [F113a relevant late night alcohol authorisation to which a late night levy requirement relates] at all the times during the applicable late night supply period when it would otherwise have been permitted by virtue of the authorisation;including in cases where the change occurs after the end of [F114the levy year in question].(5) Any payment of [F115a late night levy] which is owed to a licensing authority under this Chapter may be recovered as a debt due to the authority.(6) The following provisions of the Licensing Act 2003 apply for the purposes of this Chapter—(a) section 55A (suspension of premises licence for failure to pay annual fee);(b) section 92A (suspension of club premises certificate for failure to pay annual fee),(a) 
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13) Part 2 – LicensingCHAPTER 2 – Late night levy Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)
125
but as if a reference to an annual fee, or to the annual fee owed under section 55(2) or 92(2), were a reference to [F116a late night levy], or to the amount of [F116a late night levy] owed under this Chapter.(7) Provision that may be made by regulations under this section includes provision conferring functions or a discretion on licensing authorities.Textual AmendmentsF108 Words in s. 129(1) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 13.7.2023 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 18 para. 5(2); S.I. 2023/789, reg. 2(b)F109 Words in s. 129(2) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 13.7.2023 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 18 para. 5(3)(a); S.I. 2023/789, reg. 2(b)F110 Words in s. 129(2) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 13.7.2023 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 18 para. 5(3)(b); S.I. 2023/789, reg. 2(b)F111 Words in s. 129(4)(a) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 13.7.2023 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 18 para. 5(4)(a); S.I. 2023/789, reg. 2(b)F112 Words in s. 129(4)(b) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 13.7.2023 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 18 para. 5(4)(b); S.I. 2023/789, reg. 2(b)F113 Words in s. 129(4)(c) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 13.7.2023 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 18 para. 5(4)(c); S.I. 2023/789, reg. 2(b)F114 Words in s. 129(4) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 13.7.2023 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 18 para. 5(4)(d); S.I. 2023/789, reg. 2(b)F115 Words in s. 129(5) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 13.7.2023 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 18 para. 5(5); S.I. 2023/789, reg. 2(b)F116 Words in s. 129(6) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 13.7.2023 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 18 para. 5(6); S.I. 2023/789, reg. 2(b)Commencement InformationI176 S. 129 in force at 31.10.2012 by S.I. 2012/2670, art. 2(b)130 Net amount of levy payments(1) In this Chapter [F117, in relation to a late night levy requirement,] “the net amount of levy payments” of a licensing authority in respect of any period means the amount, calculated in accordance with regulations, which represents—(a) the aggregate amount of payments to the authority in respect of the levy that are attributable to that period, less(b) the aggregate amount of expenses of the authority attributable to that period that are permitted deductions under regulations under subsection (2)(a).(2) Regulations under subsection (1)—(1) 
126	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)Part 2 – Licensing   CHAPTER 2 – Late night levy Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)(a) must prescribe descriptions of relevant expenses which may be deducted for the purposes of calculating the net amount of levy payments for any period,(b) may make provision for determining the amounts to be taken into account in calculating the net amount of levy payments,(c) may make provision for determining the period to which a payment or deduction is attributable.(3) In subsection (2)(a), “relevant expenses” means expenses incurred by a licensing authority in the administration of [F118a late night levy requirement] including, in particular, such expenses incurred in, in connection with or in consequence of—(a) any decision mentioned in section 134(1);(b) collection of payments of the late night levy;(c) enforcement of the late night levy requirement.(4) Expenses incurred by a licensing authority which fall within subsection (3)(a) include, in particular, expenses which it incurs in connection with any application made by virtue of section 134(2)(c).(5) [F119In relation to a late night levy requirement,] a licensing authority must publish the following, in respect of each levy year—(a) before the beginning of the year, a statement of its estimate of the amount of deductions permitted under regulations under subsection (2)(a) to be made in respect of the year;(b) after the end of the year, a statement of the net amount of levy payments for the year, showing in particular the amounts mentioned in paragraphs (a) and(b) of subsection (1) attributable to the year.(6) It is for the licensing authority to determine the manner in which any statement under subsection (5) is to be published.Application of levy payments131 Application of net amount of levy payments(1) [F120In relation to a late night levy requirement,] the net amount of levy payments for any levy year must be applied as follows.(1) 
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13) Part 2 – LicensingCHAPTER 2 – Late night levy Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)
127
(2) The licensing authority—(a) must pay the specified proportion of that amount to the relevant local policing body, and(b) must apply the remainder of that amount in accordance with regulations.(3) In subsection (2)(a), “specified proportion” means the proportion determined for the levy year under section 132(1)(b) or 133(1)(d).(4) The specified proportion must be not less than 70 per cent.[F121(4A) The licensing authority must publish information as to how it applies the remainder of the net amount mentioned in subsection (2)(b).(4B) The information must be published at least once in each calendar year during which any part of the remainder is applied.(4C) It is for the licensing authority to determine the manner in which the information is published.](5) Regulations may amend subsection (4) by specifying a different proportion in place of the proportion for the time being specified in that subsection.(6) Regulations may make provision—(a) as to the time or times at which payments are to be made by the licensing authority under subsection (2);(b) for adjustments of payments in cases where payments or repayments are made[F122in respect of a levy] after the end of the levy year.(7) Regulations under this section may make provision conferring functions or a discretion on a licensing authority.Late night levy requirement: further provision132 Introduction of late night levy requirement(1) Where a licensing authority decides under section 125 that [F123a late night levy requirement] is to apply F124..., it must also decide—(a) the date on which the late night levy requirement is first to apply, and(a) 
128	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)Part 2 – Licensing   CHAPTER 2 – Late night levy Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)(b) for the first levy year and, subject to section 133, each subsequent levy year—(i) the late night supply period [F125or periods (as to which see section 126(3A))];(ii) the permitted exemption categories (if any) that are to apply F126...;(iii) the permitted reduction categories (if any) that are to apply F127...;(iv) the proportion of the net amount of levy payments that is to be paid to the relevant local policing body under section 131.(2) Subsection (1)(b)(i) is subject to section 126(4) and (5).(3) Subsection (1)(b)(iv) is subject to section 131(4).(4) Regulations under section 134 apply in relation to any decision of a licensing authority under section 125 or this section.133 Amendment of late night levy requirement(1) [F128Where, in consequence of a decision by a licensing authority under section 125, a late night levy requirement applies,] the authority may decide—(a) that the requirement is to cease to apply F129...;(b) that a different late night supply period is to apply;(c) that any permitted exemption categories or permitted reduction categories are to apply in addition to any that currently apply, or to cease to apply, [F130in relation to the late night levy requirement];(d) that a different proportion of the net amount of levy payments is to be paid to the relevant local policing body.[F131(1A) Where the late night levy requirement is in respect of both relevant late night alcohol authorisations and relevant late night refreshment authorisations, the power conferred by subsection (1)(b) includes—
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13) Part 2 – LicensingCHAPTER 2 – Late night levy Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)
129
(a) where a single late night levy period applies, power to decide that two late night levy periods are to apply instead;(b) where two late night levy periods apply, power to decide that a single late night levy period is to apply instead.](2) Subsection (1)(b) is subject to section 126(4) and (5).(3) Subsection (1)(d) is subject to section 131(4).(4) Where—(a) regulations under section 135 alter the permitted exemption categories or permitted reduction categories, and(b) by virtue of the regulations any category that applies F132... as the result of a relevant decision [F133by a licensing authority] ceases to be a permitted exemption category or permitted reduction category,the licensing authority must exercise its power under subsection (1)(c) so as to secure that all the categories that apply F134... in respect of future levy periods are permitted exemption categories or permitted reduction categories.(5) In subsection (4)(b), “relevant decision” means a decision under—(a) section 132(1)(b)(ii) or (iii), or(b) subsection (1)(c) of this section.(6) Where—(a) regulations under subsection (5) of section 131 amend subsection (4) of that section, and(b) by virtue of the regulations the proportion of the net amount of levy payments to be paid to the relevant local policing body ceases to satisfy section 131(4),the licensing authority must exercise its power under subsection (1)(d) so as to secure that the proportion of the net amount of levy payments to be paid to the relevant local policing body in respect of future levy years satisfies that provision.(7) Any decision made under subsection (1) may take effect only—(a) in the case of a decision under paragraph (a), at the end of a levy period,(b) in the case of decision under paragraph (b), (c) or (d), in respect of future levy periods.(8) Regulations under section 134 apply in relation to any decision of a licensing authority under this section.
130	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)Part 2 – Licensing   CHAPTER 2 – Late night levy Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)134 Introduction or variation of late night levy requirement: procedure(1) Regulations must make provision as to the procedure to be followed by a licensing authority in relation to any proposal for—(a) a decision under section 125(2) that [F135a late night levy requirement] is to apply F136... (and any related decision under section 132(1));(b) a decision under section 133(1)(a) that [F137a late night levy requirement] is to cease to apply F138...;(c) a decision under section 133(1)(b), (c) or (d).(2) Regulations under this section must, in particular—(a) require the licensing authority, where it proposes to make any decision mentioned in subsection (1), to consult the following about the proposal—(i) the relevant local policing body;(ii) the relevant chief officer of police;(iii) holders of [F139late night authorisations to which the levy requirement in question relates or would relate];(iv) any other persons prescribed by the regulations;(b) make provision requiring the licensing authority to publish notice of any decision mentioned in subsection (1) (and of related decisions);(c) in the case of a decision under section 125(2), make provision—(i) enabling any relevant late night authorisation to be varied under section 34, 41A, 84 or 86A of the Licensing Act 2003, on the application of the holder, [F140so that it is not a late night authorisation to which the levy requirement relates at the beginning of the first levy year], and(ii) for no fee to be payable in respect of any such application to the extent that it relates to such a variation.(3) In the case of a proposal that [F141a late night levy requirement] should apply F142..., the consultation about the proposal required under subsection (2)(a) must include consultation about the matters to be decided under section 132(1).(4) Regulations under this section may specify matters of which the licensing authority must be satisfied before deciding under section 125(2) that [F143a late night levy requirement] is to apply F144....F145(5) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13) Part 2 – LicensingCHAPTER 2 – Late night levy Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)
131
Textual AmendmentsF135 Words in s. 134(1)(a) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 13.7.2023 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 18 para. 10(2)(a); S.I. 2023/789, reg. 2(b)F136 Words in s. 134(1)(a) omitted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 13.7.2023 in so far as not already in force) by virtue of Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 18 para. 10(2)(b); S.I. 2023/789, reg. 2(b)F137 Words in s. 134(1)(b) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 13.7.2023 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 18 para. 10(2)(c); S.I. 2023/789, reg. 2(b)F138 Words in s. 134(1)(b) omitted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 13.7.2023 in so far as not already in force) by virtue of Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 18 para. 10(2)(d); S.I. 2023/789, reg. 2(b)F139 Words in s. 134(2)(a)(iii) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 13.7.2023 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 18 para. 10(3)(a); S.I. 2023/789, reg. 2(b)F140 Words in s. 134(2)(c)(i) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 13.7.2023 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 18 para. 10(3)(b); S.I. 2023/789, reg. 2(b)F141 Words in s. 134(3) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 13.7.2023 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 18 para. 10(4)(a); S.I. 2023/789, reg. 2(b)F142 Words in s. 134(3) omitted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 13.7.2023 in so far as not already in force) by virtue of Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 18 para. 10(4)(b); S.I. 2023/789, reg. 2(b)F143 Words in s. 134(4) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 13.7.2023 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 18 para. 10(5)(a); S.I. 2023/789, reg. 2(b)F144 Words in s. 134(4) omitted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 13.7.2023 in so far as not already in force) by virtue of Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 18 para. 10(5)(b); S.I. 2023/789, reg. 2(b)F145 S. 134(5) omitted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 13.7.2023 in so far as not already in force) by virtue of Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 18 para. 10(6); S.I. 2023/789, reg. 2(b)Commencement InformationI181 S. 134 in force at 31.10.2012 by S.I. 2012/2670, art. 2(b)135 Permitted exemption and reduction categories(1) Regulations may prescribe—(a) categories of holders of [F146relevant late night alcohol authorisations or relevant late night refreshment authorisations] in relation to whom, if a licensing authority so decides, [F147no requirement to pay a late night levy is to apply] (“permitted exemption categories”);(b) categories of holders of [F148relevant late night alcohol authorisations or relevant late night refreshment authorisations] in relation to whom, if a licensing authority so decides, a reduced amount of [F149a levy] is to apply (“permitted reduction categories”).(a) 
132	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)Part 2 – Licensing   CHAPTER 2 – Late night levy Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)(2) References in subsection (1) to a decision of a licensing authority are to a decision by the authority under section 132(1)(b)(ii) or (iii) or 133(1)(c) that the category in question is to apply F150....(3) Without prejudice to section 136(3), categories of holders may be prescribed for this purpose by reference, in particular, to—(a) participation in arrangements of particular descriptions;(b) particular descriptions of premises in respect of which authorisations are held.(4) Regulations under subsection (1) which prescribe permitted reduction categories must also prescribe, in relation to each such category—(a) what the reduced amount of [F151a levy] is, or(b) the manner in which the reduced amount of [F152a levy] is to be calculated,and must provide for the reduced amount of [F153a late night levy], or the manner in which it is to be calculated, to be the same[F154, in respect of all late night levy requirements,] for all holders of [F155relevant late night alcohol authorisations or relevant late night refreshment authorisations] in that category F156....Textual AmendmentsF146 Words in s. 135(1)(a) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 13.7.2023 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 18 para. 11(2)(a); S.I. 2023/789, reg. 2(b)F147 Words in s. 135(1)(a) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 13.7.2023 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 18 para. 11(2)(b); S.I. 2023/789, reg. 2(b)F148 Words in s. 135(1)(b) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 13.7.2023 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 18 para. 11(2)(c); S.I. 2023/789, reg. 2(b)F149 Words in s. 135(1)(b) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 13.7.2023 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 18 para. 11(2)(d); S.I. 2023/789, reg. 2(b)F150 Words in s. 135(2) omitted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 13.7.2023 in so far as not already in force) by virtue of Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 18 para. 11(3); S.I. 2023/789, reg. 2(b)F151 Words in s. 135(4)(a) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 13.7.2023 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 18 para. 11(4)(a); S.I. 2023/789, reg. 2(b)F152 Words in s. 135(4)(b) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 13.7.2023 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 18 para. 11(4)(b); S.I. 2023/789, reg. 2(b)F153 Words in s. 135(4) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 13.7.2023 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 18 para. 11(4)(c)(i); S.I. 2023/789, reg. 2(b)F154 Words in s. 135(4) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 13.7.2023 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 18 para. 11(4)(c)(ii); S.I. 2023/789, reg. 2(b)F155 Words in s. 135(4) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 13.7.2023 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 18 para. 11(4)(c)(iii); S.I.2023/789, reg. 2(b)
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13) Part 2 – LicensingCHAPTER 2 – Late night levy Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)
133
136 Late night levy: regulations(1) Any power to make regulations under this Chapter is exercisable by the Secretary of State, but may be exercised only with consent of Treasury.(2) Regulations may amend any provision made by or under an Act so far as necessary or expedient in consequence of any provision made by or under this Chapter.(3) Any regulations under this Chapter may—(a) make different provision for different cases;(b) make provision subject to exceptions;(c) make supplemental, incidental, consequential and transitional provision.(4) Subsection (3) is subject to section 128(4) and 135(4).[F157136ALate night levy: requests by relevant local policing bodies(1) The relevant local policing body in relation to a licensing authority may request the licensing authority to make a proposal for a decision under section 125(2) that a late night levy requirement of a kind described in the request is to apply.(2) In deciding whether to make a request, the relevant local policing body must consider the matters mentioned in section 125(3).(3) A request must be accompanied by any evidence the relevant local policing body has in support of its request.(4) In deciding how to respond to the request, the licensing authority must consider the matters mentioned in section 125(3).(5) The licensing authority must publish—(a) the request, including the evidence accompanying it, and(b) its response to the request.(6) The response must include reasons, including an explanation of the outcome of the authority’s consideration of the matters mentioned in section 125(3).(7) It is for the licensing authority to determine the manner in which it publishes the request and its response under subsection (4).](1) 
134	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)Part 2 – Licensing   CHAPTER 2 – Late night levy Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)137 InterpretationIn this Chapter—  “club premises certificate” has the same meaning as in the Licensing Act 2003 (see section 60 of that Act);“late night levy” means a levy payable under section 127(1);[F158“a late night levy requirement”] has the meaning given by section 125;  [F159“late night refreshment” has the same meaning as in the Licensing Act 2003 (see Schedule 2 to that Act);]“late night supply period”, has the meaning given by section 126;  “levy year”, in relation to a licensing authority, means a period of one year, beginning with the date specified under section 132(1)(a) or an anniversary of that date, for which [F160a late night levy requirement] applies F161...;  “licensing authority” means an authority which is a licensing authority within the meaning of the Licensing Act 2003 (see section 3 of that Act);“net amount of levy payments” has the meaning given by section 130; “payment year”, in relation to the holder of [F162a late night authorisation towhich a late night levy requirement relates], means a year to which any paymentof the late night levy by the holder in respect of the authorisation relates; “permitted exemption category” and “permitted reduction category” havethe meanings given by section 135;  “premises licence” has the same meaning as in the Licensing Act 2003 (see section 11 of that Act);“relevant late night authorisation” has the meaning given by section 126; “relevant chief officer of police”, in relation to a licensing authority, meansthe chief officer of police for the police area which comprises or includes thearea of the licensing authority;  “relevant local policing body”, in relation to a licensing authority, means the local policing body for the police area which comprises or includes the area of the licensing authority;  “supply of alcohol” has the same meaning as in Part 3 of the Licensing Act 2003 (see section 14 of that Act).
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13) Part 2 – LicensingCHAPTER 2 – Late night levy Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)
135
138 Crown application(1) This Chapter binds the Crown and has effect in relation to any premises licence, or club premises certificate, which relates to land in which there is—(a) an interest belonging to Her Majesty in right of the Crown,(b) an interest belonging to a government department, or(c) an interest held in trust for Her Majesty for the purposes of such a department.(2) This Chapter also applies in relation to any premises licence, or club premises certificate, which relates to—(a) land which is vested in, but not occupied by, Her Majesty in right of the Duchy of Lancaster, and(b) land which is vested in, but not occupied by, the possessor for the time being of the Duchy of Cornwall.(3) Provision made by or under this Chapter applies to persons in the public service of the Crown as it applies to other persons.(4) But nothing in this Chapter affects Her Majesty in Her private capacity.139 Amendments of the Licensing Act 2003(1) The Licensing Act 2003 is amended as follows.(2) In section 55 (fees: premises licences), after subsection (1) insert—“(1A) Subsection (1) is subject to regulations under section 134(2)(c)(ii) of the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (exemption from fees for variation applications prior to introduction of late night levy).”(3) In section 92 (fees: club premises certificates), after subsection (1) insert—“(1A) Subsection (1) is subject to regulations under section 134(2)(c)(ii) of the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (exemption from fees for variation applications prior to introduction of late night levy).”
136	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)Part 3 – Parliament Square etcCHAPTER 3 – Alcohol disorder zones Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)CHAPTER 3ALCOHOL DISORDER ZONES140 Alcohol disorder zones: repealSections 15 to 20 of the Violent Crime Reduction Act 2006 (alcohol disorder zones) are repealed.PART 3PARLIAMENT SQUARE [F163ETC]Repeal of SOCPA 2005 provisions141 Demonstrations in vicinity of Parliament: repeal of SOCPA 2005 provisions(1) Sections 132 to 138 of the Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (which regulate demonstrations and use of loudspeakers in the vicinity of Parliament) are repealed.(2) The public assemblies in relation to which section 14 of the Public Order Act 1986 applies, as a consequence of the repeal of section 132(6) of the Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005, include public assemblies which started, or were being organised, before this section comes into force.
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13) Part 3 – Parliament Square etcCHAPTER 3 – Alcohol disorder zones Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)Controls on activities in Parliament Square [F164etc]
137
142 Controlled area of Parliament Square(1) For the purposes of this Part, the “controlled area of Parliament Square” means the area of land that is comprised in—(a) the central garden of Parliament Square, and(b) the footways that immediately adjoin the central garden of Parliament Square.(2) In subsection (1)—  “the central garden of Parliament Square” means the site in Parliament Square on which the Minister of Works was authorised by the Parliament Square (Improvements) Act 1949 to lay out the garden referred to in that Act as “the new central garden”;  “footway” has the same meaning as in the Highways Act 1980 (see section 329(1) of that Act).[F165142AOther controlled areas in vicinity of the Palace of Westminster(1) For the purposes of this Part, the “Palace of Westminster controlled area” means the area of land in the City of Westminster that is comprised in—(a) the highways in the postal district SW1 known as—(i) Bridge Street,[ Canon Row,F166(ia)(ib) Parliament Street, (ic) Derby Gate,(id) Parliament Square,](ii) St Margaret's Street, and(iii) Abingdon Street,(i) 
[F167(aa)
so much of the highway in the postal district SW1 known as Victoria Embankment as lies between the highway in that district known as Bridge Street and the highway in that district known as Richmond Terrace,]
(b) so much of the highway in the postal district SW1 known as Great College Street as immediately adjoins Abingdon Street Garden,(c) Old Palace Yard,(d) Abingdon Street Garden (and its pathways), and(e) Victoria Tower Gardens.(a) 
138	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)Part 3 – Parliament Square etcCHAPTER 3 – Alcohol disorder zones Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)[ A reference to a highway in subsection (1)(a) or (aa) includes any land immediatelyF168(1A) adjoining that highway and to which the public have or are permitted access.](2) In subsection (1)—  “Abingdon Street Garden” means the garden constructed on the sites of properties formerly known as 18 to 28 (both inclusive) Abingdon Street, London, SW1, together with the garden surrounding the adjoining Jewel Tower and the lawn surrounding the King George V Memorial;  “highway” has the same meaning as in the Highways Act 1980 (see section 328 of that Act);“Old Palace Yard” includes the King George V Memorial.]143 Prohibited activities in controlled area of Parliament Square [F169or in Palace of Westminster controlled area](1) A constable or authorised officer who has reasonable grounds for believing that a person is doing, or is about to do, a prohibited activity may direct the person—(a) to cease doing that activity, or(b) (as the case may be) not to start doing that activity.(2) For the purposes of this Part, a “prohibited activity” is any of the following—(a) operating any amplified noise equipment in the controlled area of Parliament Square [F170or in the Palace of Westminster controlled area];(b) erecting or keeping erected in the controlled area of Parliament Square—(i) any tent, or(ii) any other structure that is designed, or adapted, (solely or mainly) for the purpose of facilitating sleeping or staying in a place for any period;(c) using any tent or other such structure in the controlled area of Parliament Square for the purpose of sleeping or staying in that area;(d) placing or keeping in place in the controlled area of Parliament Square any sleeping equipment with a view to its use (whether or not by the person placing it or keeping it in place) for the purpose of sleeping overnight in that area;(e) using any sleeping equipment in the controlled area of Parliament Square for the purpose of sleeping overnight in that area.[F171(f) obstructing, by the use of any item or otherwise, the passage of a vehicle of any description into or out of an entrance into or exit from the Parliamentary Estate, where that entrance or exit is within, or adjoins, the Palace of Westminster controlled area.]
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13) Part 3 – Parliament Square etcCHAPTER 3 – Alcohol disorder zones Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)
139
(3) But an activity is not to be treated as a “prohibited activity” within subsection (2) if it is done—(a) for police, fire and rescue authority or ambulance purposes,(b) by or on behalf of a [F172relevant person], or(c) by a person so far as authorised under section 147 to do it (authorisation for operation of amplified noise equipment).(4) In subsection (2)(a) “amplified noise equipment” means any device that is designed or adapted for amplifying sound, including (but not limited to)—(a) loudspeakers, and(b) loudhailers.[F173(4A) In subsection (2)(f) the reference to obstructing the passage of a vehicle includes making the passage of a vehicle more difficult.](5) In subsection (3)(b) [F174“relevant person”] means any of the following—(a) a Minister of the Crown or a government department,(b) the Greater London Authority, F175...(c) Westminster City Council.[F176(d)	a relevant member of the House of Lords staff, or(e)	a relevant member of the House of Commons staff][F177(5A) In subsection (5)—  “relevant member of the House of Lords staff” has the meaning given by section 194(6) of the Employment Rights Act 1996;  “relevant member of the House of Commons staff” has the meaning given by section 195(5) of that Act.](6) It is immaterial for the purposes of a prohibited activity—(a) in the case of an activity within subsection (2)(b) or (c) of keeping a tent or similar structure erected or using a tent or similar structure, whether the tent or structure was first erected before or after the coming into force of this section;(b) in the case of an activity within subsection (2)(d) or (e) of keeping in place any sleeping equipment or using any such equipment, whether the sleeping equipment was first placed before or after the coming into force of this section.(7) In this section “sleeping equipment” means any sleeping bag, mattress or other similar item designed, or adapted, (solely or mainly) for the purpose of facilitating sleeping in a place.(8) A person who fails without reasonable excuse to comply with a direction under subsection (1) commits an offence and is liable on summary conviction to a fine not exceeding level 5 on the standard scale.
140	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)Part 3 – Parliament Square etcCHAPTER 3 – Alcohol disorder zones Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)144 Directions under section 143: further provision(1) A direction requiring a person to cease doing a prohibited activity may include a direction that the person does not start doing that activity again after having ceased it.(2) A direction requiring a person not to start doing a prohibited activity continues in force until—(a) the end of such period beginning with the day on which the direction is given as may be specified by the constable or authorised officer giving the direction, or(b) if no such period is specified, the end of the period of 90 days beginning with the day on which the direction is given.(3) A period specified under subsection (2)(a) may not be longer than 90 days.(4) A direction may be given to a person to cease operating, or not to start operating, any amplified noise equipment only if it appears to the constable or authorised officer giving the direction that the following condition is met.(5) The condition is that the person is operating, or is about to operate, the equipment in such a manner as to produce sound that other persons in or in the vicinity of the controlled area of Parliament Square[F178, or the Palace of Westminster controlled area,] can hear or are likely to be able to hear.(6) A direction—(a) may be given orally,(b) may be given to any person individually or to two or more persons together, and(c) may be withdrawn or varied by the person who gave it.(7) In this section—“amplified noise equipment” has the meaning given by section 143(4); “direction” means a direction given under section 143(1).
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13) Part 3 – Parliament Square etcCHAPTER 3 – Alcohol disorder zones Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)
141
145 Power to seize property(1) A constable or authorised officer may seize and retain a prohibited item that is on any land in the controlled area of Parliament Square if it appears to that constable or officer that the item is being, or has been, used in connection with the commission of an offence under section 143 [F179in that area].[F180(1A) A constable or authorised officer may seize and retain a prohibited item that is on any land in the Palace of Westminster controlled area if it appears to that constable or officer that the item is being, or has been, used in connection with the commission of an offence under section 143 in that area.](2) A constable may seize and retain a prohibited item that is on any land outside of the controlled area of Parliament Square if it appears to the constable that the item has been used in connection with the commission of an offence under section 143 [F181in that area].[F182(2A) A constable may seize and retain a prohibited item that is on any land outside of the Palace of Westminster controlled area if it appears to the constable that the item has been used in connection with the commission of an offence under section 143 in that area.](3) A “prohibited item” is any item of a kind mentioned in section 143(2).(4) A constable may use reasonable force, if necessary, in exercising a power of seizure under this section.(5) An item seized under this section must be returned to the person from whom it was seized—(a) no later than the end of the period of 28 days beginning with the day on which the item was seized, or(b) if proceedings are commenced against the person for an offence under section 143 before the return of the item under paragraph (a), at the conclusion of those proceedings.(6) If it is not possible to return an item under subsection (5) because the name or address of the person from whom it was seized is not known—(a) the item may be returned to any other person appearing to have rights in the property who has come forward to claim it, or(b) if there is no such person, the item may be disposed of or destroyed at any time after the end of the period of 90 days beginning with the day on which the item was seized.(7) Subsections (5)(b) and (6) do not apply if a court makes an order under section 146(1)(a) for the forfeiture of the item.(a) 
142	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)Part 3 – Parliament Square etcCHAPTER 3 – Alcohol disorder zones Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)(8) The references in [F183this section] to an item that is “on” any land include references to an item that is in the possession of a person who is on any such land.146 Power of court on conviction(1) The court may do either or both of the following on the conviction of a person (“P”) of an offence under section 143—(a) make an order providing for the forfeiture of any item of a kind mentioned in subsection (2) of that section that was used in the commission of the offence;(b) make such other order as the court considers appropriate for the purpose of preventing P from engaging in any prohibited activity in [F184a relevant area].(2) An order under subsection (1)(b) may (in particular) require P not to enter [F185a relevant area] for such period as may be specified in the order.[F186(2A) In this section “relevant area” means an area consisting of either or both of the following areas—(a) the controlled area of Parliament Square , and(b) the Palace of Westminster controlled area.](3) Power of the court to make an order under this section is in addition to the court's power to impose a fine under section 143(8).(1) 
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13) Part 3 – Parliament Square etcCHAPTER 3 – Alcohol disorder zones Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)
143
147 Authorisation for operation of amplified noise equipment(1) The responsible authority for any land in the controlled area of Parliament Square [F187or the Palace of Westminster controlled area] may authorise a person in accordance with this section to operate on that land [F188(or any part of it)] any amplified noise equipment (as defined by section 143(4)).(2) An application for authorisation must be made to the responsible authority by or on behalf of the person (or persons) seeking the authorisation.(3) The responsible authority may—(a) determine the form in which, and the manner in which, an application is to be made;(b) specify the information to be supplied in connection with an application;(c) require a fee to be paid for determining an application.(4) If an application is duly made to a responsible authority, the authority must—(a) determine the application, and(b) give notice in writing to the applicant of the authority's decision within the period of 21 days beginning with the day on which the authority receives the application.(5) The notice must specify—(a) the person (or persons) authorised (whether by name or description),(b) the kind of amplified noise equipment to which the authorisation applies,(c) the period to which the authorisation applies, and(d) any conditions to which the authorisation is subject.(6) The responsible authority may at any time—(a) withdraw an authorisation given to a person under this section, or(b) vary any condition to which an authorisation is subject.(7) Variation under subsection (6)(b) includes—(a) imposing a new condition,(b) removing an existing condition, or(c) altering any period to which a condition applies.(8) The exercise of a power under subsection (6) to withdraw an authorisation or to vary a condition is effected by the responsible authority giving notice in writing to the applicant.(1) 
144	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)Part 3 – Parliament Square etcCHAPTER 3 – Alcohol disorder zones Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)148 Meaning of “authorised officer” and “responsible authority”(1) This section applies for the purposes of this Part.(2) “Authorised officer”, in relation to any land in the controlled area of Parliament Square[F189, or in relation to any land in the Palace of Westminster controlled area other than Royal Park land,] means—(a) an employee of the responsible authority for that land who is authorised in writing by the authority for the purposes of this Part, and(b) any other person who, under arrangements made with the responsible authority (whether by that or any other person), is so authorised for the purposes of this Part.(3) “Responsible authority”, in relation to any land in the controlled area of Parliament Square, means—(a) the Greater London Authority, for any land comprised in the central garden of Parliament Square (as defined by section 142(2)), and(b) Westminster City Council, for any other land.[F190(4) “Responsible authority”, in relation to any land in the Palace of Westminster controlled area, means—(a) the Secretary of State, for any land comprised in Royal Park land;(b) Westminster City Council, for any other land.(5) In this section “Royal Park land” means any land of a description specified in Schedule 1 to the Royal Parks and Other Open Spaces Regulations 1997 (S.I. 1997/1639), as that Schedule has effect on the day on which the Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is passed.]149 Effect of Part on byelaws(1) In section 385 of the Greater London Authority Act 1999 (byelaws), after subsection (6) insert—“(6A) Byelaws under this section may not be made as respects Parliament Square Garden for the purpose of prohibiting a particular activity so far as that activity is a prohibited activity for the purposes of Part 3 of the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (see section 143(2) of that Act).”.(2) Any byelaw made under section 385 of the Greater London Authority Act 1999 before the date on which section 143 above comes into force ceases to have effect on that date so far as the byelaw makes provision prohibiting, as respects the controlled area(1) 
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13) Part 3 – Parliament Square etcCHAPTER 3 – Alcohol disorder zones Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)
145
of Parliament Square, a particular activity that is a prohibited activity for the purposes of this Part.(3) Nothing in this Part restricts the making of any byelaw under section 235(1) of the Local Government Act 1972 (power of councils to make byelaws) for the purpose of prohibiting, as respects the controlled area of Parliament Square [F191or the Palace of Westminster controlled area], a particular activity except so far as the activity is a prohibited activity for the purposes of this Part.[F192149APower to specify other areas as controlled areas(1) The Secretary of State may by regulations provide for any provision of sections 143 to 148 and 149(3) to apply, with or without modifications, in relation to an area specified in the regulations.(2) An area may be specified in regulations under subsection (1) by description, by reference to a map or plan or in any other way.(3) Regulations under subsection (1) may be made only if—(a) either House of Parliament is, or is proposed to be, located somewhere other than the Palace of Westminster as a result of the Parliamentary building works or for any other reason, and(b) as a result of that relocation, or proposed relocation, the Secretary of State considers that it is reasonably necessary for activities which are prohibited in relation to the controlled area of Parliament Square or the Palace of Westminster controlled area to be prohibited in relation to the area specified in the regulations.(4) In subsection (3)(a) “the Parliamentary building works” has the meaning given by section 1(1) of the Parliamentary Buildings (Restoration and Renewal) Act 2019.(5) The Secretary of State may by regulations make provision for any other enactment, or any instrument made under an enactment, to have effect with modifications in consequence of regulations under subsection (1).]
146	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)Part 4 – MiscellaneousCHAPTER 3 – Alcohol disorder zones Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)PART 4MISCELLANEOUSSeizure powers150 Powers of seizure etc under certain regulations and byelaws(1) In section 2 of the Parks Regulation (Amendment) Act 1926 (power to make regulations), after subsection (1) insert—“(1A) Regulations under subsection (1) may include provision applying (with any necessary modifications) sections 4 to 6 of the Royal Parks (Trading) Act 2000 (seizure, retention, disposal and forfeiture of property) in relation to offences under that subsection that are not park trading offences for the purposes of that Act.”.(2) After section 237 of the Local Government Act 1972 (offences against byelaws) insert—“237ZA Section 235 byelaws: powers of seizure etcA byelaw made under section 235 may include provision for or in connection with—(a) the seizure and retention of any property in connection with any contravention of the byelaw, and(b) the forfeiture of any such property on a person's conviction of an offence of contravention of the byelaw.”.(3) In section 385 of the Greater London Authority Act 1999 (byelaws), in subsection (4)(b) for “a trading byelaw” substitute “ any byelaw under this section ”.Misuse of drugs151 Temporary control of drugsSchedule 17 (which makes provision for temporary class drug orders under the Misuse of Drugs Act 1971) has effect.
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13) Part 4 – MiscellaneousCHAPTER 3 – Alcohol disorder zones Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)
147
152 Advisory Council on the Misuse of DrugsIn Schedule 1 to the Misuse of Drugs Act 1971 (constitution etc of the Advisory Council on the Misuse of Drugs), in paragraph 1—(a) in sub-paragraph (1), omit the words after “appropriate”, and(b) omit sub-paragraph (2).Arrest warrants153 Restriction on issue of arrest warrants in private prosecutions(1) In section 1 of the Magistrates' Courts Act 1980 (issue of summons or warrant), after subsection (4) insert—“(4A) Where a person who is not a public prosecutor lays an information before a justice of the peace in respect of an offence to which this subsection applies, no warrant shall be issued under this section without the consent of the Director of Public Prosecutions.(4B) In subsection (4A) “public prosecutor” has the same meaning as in section 29 of the Criminal Justice Act 2003.(4C) Subsection (4A) applies to—(a) a qualifying offence which is alleged to have been committed outside the United Kingdom, or(b) an ancillary offence relating to a qualifying offence where it is alleged that the qualifying offence was, or would have been, committed outside the United Kingdom.(4D) In subsection (4C) “qualifying offence” means any of the following—(a) piracy or an offence under section 2 of the Piracy Act 1837 (piracy where murder is attempted);(b) an offence under section 1 of the Geneva Conventions Act 1957 (grave breaches of Geneva conventions);(c) an offence which (disregarding the provisions of the Suppression of Terrorism Act 1978, the Nuclear Material (Offences) Act 1983, the United Nations Personnel Act 1997 and the Terrorism Act 2000) would not be an offence apart from section 1 of the Internationally Protected Persons Act 1978 (attacks and threats of attacks on protected persons);(d) an offence under section 1 of the Taking of Hostages Act 1982 (hostage-taking);(e) an offence under section 1, 2 or 6 of the Aviation Security Act 1982 (hijacking etc);(f) an offence which (disregarding the provisions of the Internationally Protected Persons Act 1978, the Suppression of Terrorism Act 1978, the United Nations Personnel Act 1997 and the Terrorism Act 2000)(a) 
148	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)Part 5 – Final provisionsCHAPTER 3 – Alcohol disorder zones Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)would not be an offence apart from sections 1 to 2A of the Nuclear Material (Offences) Act 1983 (offences relating to nuclear material);(g) an offence under section 134 of the Criminal Justice Act 1988 (torture);(h) an offence under section 1 of the Aviation and Maritime Security Act 1990 (endangering safety at aerodromes);(i) an offence under sections 9 to 14 of that Act (hijacking ships etc);(j) an offence which (disregarding the provisions of the Internationally Protected Persons Act 1978, the Suppression of Terrorism Act 1978, the Nuclear Material (Offences) Act 1983 and the Terrorism Act 2000) would not be an offence apart from sections 1 to 3 of the United Nations Personnel Act 1997 (attacks on UN workers etc).(4E) In subsection (4C) “ancillary offence”, in relation to an offence, means—(a) an offence under Part 2 of the Serious Crime Act 2007 (encouraging or assisting crime) in relation to the offence (including, in relation to times before the commencement of that Part, an offence of incitement);(b) attempting or conspiring to commit the offence.”.(2) In section 25 of the Prosecution of Offences Act 1985 (consents to prosecutions etc), after subsection (2) insert—“(2A) Subsection (2)(a) is subject to section 1(4A) of the Magistrates' Courts Act 1980.”.PART 5FINAL PROVISIONS154 Orders and regulations(1) Any power of the Secretary of State F193... under this Act to make an order or regulations is exercisable by statutory instrument.(2) A statutory instrument containing any of the following orders or regulations may not be made unless a draft of the instrument has been laid before, and approved by a resolution of, each House of Parliament—(a) regulations under section 31 or 54(2) or paragraph 36(1) (a) or 40 of Schedule 6;(b) an order under section 50 or 58;(c) regulations under section 126, 128, 129, 131, 134 or 136(2);(d) an order under paragraph 24 of Schedule 15 which contains provision amending an Act (whether or not it also contains other provision).(3) Any other statutory instrument containing an order or regulations under this Act, except an instrument containing only an order specified in subsection (4), is subject to annulment in pursuance of a resolution of either House of Parliament.(4) The orders referred to subsection (3) are those under section 54(1)(b), 55(1), 75 or 157.(5) An order or regulations made by the Secretary of State F194... under this Act may—(1) 
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13) Part 5 – Final provisionsCHAPTER 3 – Alcohol disorder zones Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)(a) include incidental, supplementary and consequential provision;(b) make transitory or transitional provision or savings;(c) make different provision for different cases, areas or purposes.
149
155 MoneyThe following are to be paid out of money provided by Parliament—(a) expenditure incurred by a Minister of the Crown by virtue of this Act;(b) any increase attributable to this Act in the sums payable under any other Act out of money so provided.156 Extent(1) This Act extends to England and Wales only.(2) Subsection (1) is subject to subsections (3) to (6).(3) The following provisions extend to England and Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland—(a) section 58 (power to make provision about elections etc),(b) section 151 and Schedule 17 (temporary class drug orders),(c) section 152 (Advisory Council on the Misuse of Drugs),(d) section 154 (orders and regulations) so far as relating to an order under section 58, and(e) this section and sections 157 and 158 (final provisions).(4) Section 98 and Schedule 15 apply to England and Wales and Scotland.(5) The amendments, repeals and revocations made by this Act (so far as not made by provision mentioned in subsection (3)(b) or (c)) have the same extent as the provisions amended, repealed or revoked.(6) Subsection (5) does not apply to the amendment made to section 2 of the Parks Regulation (Amendment) Act 1926 by section 150(1) above (which accordingly extends to England and Wales only).157 Commencement(1) The provisions of this Act come into force on such day as the Secretary of State may by order appoint.(2) Subsection (1) is subject to subsections (3) and (4).
150	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)Part 5 – Final provisionsCHAPTER 3 – Alcohol disorder zones Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)(3) The following provisions come into force on the day on which this Act is passed—(a) section 58 (power to make provision about elections);(b) section 153 (restrictions on issue of arrest warrants in private prosecutions);(c) sections 154 to 158 (final).(4) Section 150(2), so far as relating to byelaws made by local authorities in Wales, comes into force on such day as the Welsh Ministers may by order appoint.(5) Section 154(1) and (5)(b) applies to an order of the Welsh Ministers under subsection (4) as it applies to an order of the Secretary of State under this Act.158 Short titleThis Act may be cited as the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011.
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13) SCHEDULE 1 – Police and crime commissioners Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)SCHEDULES 
151
SCHEDULE 1	Section 1POLICE AND CRIME COMMISSIONERSIntroduction1 This Schedule applies in relation to the police and crime commissioners established under section 1.Salary etc2 (1) A police and crime commissioner is to be paid a salary.(2) The Secretary of State is to determine the amount of a commissioner's salary.(3) The Secretary of State may determine that different salaries are to be payable to the police and crime commissioners for different police areas.[F195(4) Where the person who is the police and crime commissioner for a police area is also a fire and rescue authority created by an order under section 4A of the Fire and Rescue Services Act 2004, a determination under this paragraph in relation to that person may, in particular, take account of the fact that the person also exercises functions as that fire and rescue authority.]
152	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 1 – Police and crime commissionersDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)3 (1) A police and crime commissioner is to be paid authorised allowances.(2) In this paragraph “authorised allowances” means allowances, in respect of expenses incurred by a commissioner in the exercise of the commissioner's functions, which are of the kinds and amounts determined by the Secretary of State as payable in accordance with this paragraph.(3) A determination under this paragraph may make different provision for different cases.4 (1) A police and crime commissioner must make authorised pension payments.(2) In this paragraph “authorised pension payments” means—(a) pensions to, or in respect of, persons who have been commissioner, and(b) amounts for or towards provision of pensions to, or in respect of, persons who have been commissioner,which are of the kinds and amounts determined by the Secretary of State as payable in accordance with this paragraph.5 (1) Payments under paragraphs 2 and 3 are to be made by the police and crime commissioner concerned.(2) The Secretary of State must publish every determination under any of paragraphs 2 to 4.(2) 
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13) SCHEDULE 1 – Police and crime commissioners Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)
153
Staff6 (1) A police and crime commissioner must appoint—(a) a person to be the head of the commissioner's staff (referred to in this Part as the commissioner's chief executive); and(b) a person to be responsible for the proper administration of the commissioner's financial affairs (referred to in this Part as the commissioner's chief finance officer).(2) A police and crime commissioner must comply with paragraphs 9 to 12 in appointing the commissioner's chief executive or the commissioner's chief finance officer.(3) A police and crime commissioner may appoint such other staff as the commissioner thinks appropriate to enable the commissioner to exercise the functions of commissioner.(4) Section 113 of the Local Government Finance Act 1988 applies to the chief finance officer of a police and crime commissioner as it applies to the persons having responsibility for the administration of financial affairs mentioned in that section.7 (1) A police and crime commissioner must appoint a person to act as chief executive, or a chief finance officer, if and for as long as—(a) that post is vacant, or(b) the holder of that post is, in the commissioner's opinion, unable to carry out the duties of that post.(2) A person may not be appointed under sub-paragraph (1) to act as chief finance officer unless the person is qualified to be appointed to the post under paragraph 6.(3) A reference in any enactment to the chief executive, or chief finance officer, of a police and crime commissioner includes a reference to a person acting as chief executive, or chief finance officer, in accordance with sub-paragraph (1).(2) 
154	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 1 – Police and crime commissionersDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)The deputy police and crime commissioner8 (1) This paragraph applies to a person appointed under section 18 by a police and crime commissioner to be the deputy police and crime commissioner.(2) None of the following may be appointed as the deputy police and crime commissioner—(a) a person who has not attained the age of 18 on the day of the appointment;(b) a person who is subject to a relevant disqualification;(c) a Member of the House of Commons;(d) a member of the European Parliament;(e) a member of the National Assembly for Wales;(f) a member of the Scottish Parliament;(g) a member of the Northern Ireland Assembly.[F196(3) The terms and conditions of a person appointed as the deputy police and crime commissioner must ensure that the term of office ends no later than the sixth day after the day of the poll at the next ordinary election of police and crime commissioners (that is, the day on which the term of office of the appointing police and crime commissioner would, if there were no vacancy in the office before then, end in accordance with section 50(7)(b)).(3A) The terms and conditions must also provide for the deputy police and crime commissioner’s appointment to end when, following an election held under section 51 to fill a vacancy in the office of the appointing police and crime commissioner, the person elected makes and delivers a declaration of acceptance of office under section 70(1).(3B) Subject to sub-paragraphs (3) and (3A), the terms and conditions may make such provision about termination as the appointing police and crime commissioner thinks appropriate.](4) Section 7 of the Local Government and Housing Act 1989 (appointment of staff on merit) does not apply to the deputy police and crime commissioner.F197(5) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .(6) For the purposes of this paragraph, a person is subject to a relevant disqualification if the person is disqualified from being elected as, or being, a police and crime commissioner under—(a) section 65(1) (police officers, police-related employment etc), other than paragraph (e)(ii); or(a) 
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13) SCHEDULE 1 – Police and crime commissioners Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)
155
(b) section 66(1), (3)(a)(iii) or (iv), (3)(c) or (3)(d) (citizenship, bankruptcy, criminal convictions & corrupt or illegal election practices).Scrutiny of senior appointments9 (1) A police and crime commissioner must notify the relevant police and crime panel of each proposed appointment by the commissioner of—(a) the commissioner's chief executive,(b) the commissioner's chief finance officer, or(c) a deputy police and crime commissioner.(2) In a case where the police and crime commissioner notifies the relevant police and crime panel of such an appointment (“a proposed senior appointment”), the commissioner must also notify the panel of the following information—(a) the name of the person whom the commissioner is proposing to appoint (“the candidate”);(b) the criteria used to assess the suitability of the candidate for the appointment;(c) why the candidate satisfies those criteria; and(d) the terms and conditions on which the candidate is to be appointed.
156	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 1 – Police and crime commissionersDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)10 (1) This paragraph applies if a police and crime panel is notified under paragraph 9 of a proposed senior appointment.(2) The panel must review the proposed senior appointment.(3) The panel must make a report to the commissioner on the proposed senior appointment.(4) The report must include a recommendation to the police and crime commissioner as to whether or not the candidate should be appointed.(5) The panel must comply with sub-paragraphs (2) to (4), within the period of three weeks beginning with the day on which the panel receives the notification from the commissioner of the proposed senior appointment.(6) The panel must publish the report to the commissioner made under this paragraph.(7) It is for the panel to determine the manner in which the recommendation is to be published in accordance with sub-paragraph (6).(8) In calculating the period of three weeks for the purpose of sub-paragraph (5), any relevant post-election period is to be ignored.(9) For that purpose, “relevant post-election period” means the period that—(a) begins with the day of the poll at an ordinary election of a police and crime commissioner under section 50, and(b) ends with the day on which the person elected as police and crime commissioner delivers a declaration of acceptance of office under section 70.11 (1) A police and crime panel must hold a confirmation hearing before making a report and recommendation under paragraph 10 to the police and crime commissioner in relation to a proposed senior appointment.(2) For the purposes of this Schedule a “confirmation hearing” is a meeting of the panel, held in public, at which the candidate is requested to appear for the purpose of answering questions relating to the appointment.(3) References in this Schedule to a person appearing at a meeting of the panel are references to the person—(a) attending the meeting in person, or(a) 
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13) SCHEDULE 1 – Police and crime commissioners Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)
157
(b) not attending the meeting in person, but participating in the proceedings at the meeting by any means that enable the person to hear, and be heard in, those proceedings as they happen.12 (1) The police and crime commissioner may accept or reject the panel's recommendation under paragraph 10 as to whether or not the candidate should be appointed.(2) The police and crime commissioner must notify the panel of the decision whether to accept or reject the recommendation.Remuneration etc of staff13 (1) A police and crime commissioner may pay remuneration, allowances and gratuities to the members of the commissioner's staff.(2) A police and crime commissioner may pay—(a) pensions to, or in respect of, persons who have been members of the commissioner's staff, and(b) amounts for or towards provision of pensions to, or in respect of, persons who have been members of the commissioner's staff.(3) In this paragraph “allowances”, in relation to a member of a commissioner's staff, means allowances in respect of expenses incurred by the member of staff in the course of employment as such a member of staff.
158	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 1 – Police and crime commissionersDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)Incidental powers14 (1) A police and crime commissioner may do anything which is calculated to facilitate, or is conducive or incidental to, the exercise of the functions of commissioner.(2) That includes—(a) entering into contracts and other agreements (whether legally binding or not);(b) acquiring and disposing of property (including land);(c) borrowing money.(3) This paragraph is subject to the other provisions of this Act and to any other enactment about the powers of police and crime commissioners.Protection from personal liability15 (1) A person who is a police and crime commissioner has no personal liability for an act or omission done by the person in the exercise of the commissioner's functions unless it is shown to have been done otherwise than in good faith.(2) A person who is a member of staff of a police and crime commissioner has no personal liability for an act or omission done by the person in the carrying out of duties as a member of staff unless it is shown to have been done otherwise than in good faith.Financial year16 (1) The first financial year of a police and crime commissioner is the period that—(a) begins with the day on which the first election of the commissioner is held, and(b) ends with the following 31 March.(2) After that, a commissioner's financial year is the period of 12 months ending with 31 March.
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13) SCHEDULE 2 – Chief constablesDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)
159
SCHEDULE 2	Section 2CHIEF CONSTABLESIntroduction1 This Schedule applies to the chief constables established under section 2.Status, name etc2 A chief constable is a corporation sole.3 The name of the chief constable for a police force is “the Chief Constable of” with the addition of the name of the police force.Civilian staff4 (1) The chief constable of a police force must appoint a person to be responsible for the proper administration of the police force's financial affairs (referred to in this Part as the police force's chief finance officer).(2) The chief constable of a police force may appoint such other staff as the chief constable thinks appropriate—(a) to enable the chief constable to exercise the chief constable's functions, or(b) otherwise to assist the relevant police force.(a) 
160	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 2 – Chief constablesDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)(3) Section 113 of the Local Government Finance Act 1988 applies to the chief finance officer of a chief constable as it applies to the persons having responsibility for the administration of financial affairs mentioned in that section.5 (1) A chief constable must appoint a qualified person to act as chief finance officer, if and for as long as—(a) that post is vacant, or(b) the holder of that post is, in the chief constable's opinion, unable to carry out the duties of that post.(2) For the purposes of sub-paragraph (1) a person is qualified to be appointed to act as chief finance officer if that person is qualified to be appointed to the post under paragraph 4.(3) A reference in any enactment to the police force's chief finance officer includes a reference to a person acting as chief finance officer in accordance with sub- paragraph (1).Remuneration etc of staff6 (1) A chief constable may pay remuneration, allowances and gratuities to the members of the police force's civilian staff.(2) A chief constable may pay—(a) pensions to, or in respect of, persons who have been members of the police force's civilian staff, and(b) amounts for or towards provision of pensions to, or in respect of, persons who have been members of the police force's civilian staff.(3) In this paragraph “allowances”, in relation to a member of a police force's civilian staff, means allowances in respect of expenses incurred by the member of staff in the course of employment as such a member of staff.Incidental powers7 (1) A chief constable may do anything which is calculated to facilitate, or is conducive or incidental to, the exercise of the functions of chief constable.(2) That includes—(2) 
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13) SCHEDULE 2 – Chief constablesDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)
161
(a) entering into contracts and other agreements (whether legally binding or not), but only with the consent of the relevant police and crime commissioner;(b) acquiring and disposing of property, apart from land, but only with the consent of the relevant police and crime commissioner.F198(3) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .(4) Sub-paragraph (2)(a) does not require the chief constable to obtain the consent of the relevant police and crime commissioner in order to enter into a contract or other agreement with a person—(a) by virtue of which the person becomes, or is, a member of the police force's civilian staff, or(b) which otherwise relates to the person's membership of that civilian staff (including the terms and conditions of the person's membership).(5) This paragraph is subject to the other provisions of this Act and to any other enactment about the powers of chief constables.[F199Financial arrangements etc7A (1) A chief constable may, by way of temporary loan or overdraft from a bank or otherwise, borrow sums temporarily required by the chief constable, but only—(a) for the purpose of meeting expenses pending the receipt of revenues receivable by the chief constable in respect of the period of account in which the expenses are chargeable,(b) in sterling, and(c) with the consent of the relevant police and crime commissioner.(2) A chief constable—(a) may not borrow money except as permitted by sub-paragraph (1);(b) may not enter into a credit arrangement.(3) A chief constable may invest—(a) for any purpose relevant to the chief constable's functions under any enactment, or(b) for the purpose of the prudent management of the chief constable's financial affairs,(a) 
162	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 2 – Chief constablesDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)but only with the consent of the relevant police and crime commissioner.(4) The following provisions of Part 1 of the Local Government Act 2003 (capital finance etc and accounts) apply in relation to a chief constable as they apply in relation to a local authority—(a) section 6 (protection of lenders);(b) section 7 (meaning of “credit arrangements”);(c) sections 9 to 11 (capital receipts), except for section 11(2)(b) and (3) to (6);(d) section 13 (security for money borrowed etc);(e) section 14 (information);(f) section 15 (guidance);(g) section 16 (meaning of “capital expenditure”);(h) section 17 (external funds);(i) section 18 (companies etc), ignoring any reference to a Passenger Transport Executive;(j) section 20 (directions);(k) sections 21 and 22 (accounts);(l) section 24(1) and (2)(b) (application to Wales).(5) Regulations made by the Secretary of State under any of the provisions listed in sub- paragraph (4) apply in relation to the chief constable of a police force in England as they apply in relation to a local authority in England.(6) Regulations made by the Welsh Ministers under any of those provisions apply in relation to the chief constable of a police force in Wales as they apply in relation to a local authority in Wales.(7) Any of those provisions, or regulations made under them, that apply for the purposes of Chapter 1 of Part 1 of the Local Government Act 2003 apply also (so far as relevant) for the purposes of sub-paragraphs (1) to (3).(8) An order under section 217 or 218 of the Local Government and Public Involvement in Health Act 2007, as it has effect for the purposes of section 18(2)(b) of the Local Government Act 2003 as applied by sub-paragraph (4)(i), applies—(a) with the substitution of a reference to a chief constable for a reference to a local authority, and(b) with any other necessary modifications.]Damages and costs in legal proceedings8 (1) The following amounts must be paid out of the police fund kept by the relevant police and crime commissioner—(a) any damages or costs awarded against a chief constable in any proceedings brought against the chief constable in respect of the acts or omissions of a member of the relevant police force's civilian staff;(b) any costs incurred by a chief constable in any such proceedings so far as not recovered by the chief constable in the proceedings; and(c) any sum required in connection with the settlement of any claim made against a chief constable in respect of the acts or omissions of a member of the relevant police force's civilian staff, if the settlement is approved by the relevant police and crime commissioner.(a) 
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13) SCHEDULE 3 – Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)
163
(2) A police and crime commissioner may, in such cases and to such extent as appear to the commissioner to be appropriate, pay out of the police fund kept by the commissioner—(a) any damages or costs awarded against a member of the relevant police force's civilian staff in proceedings for any unlawful conduct of that person;(b) any costs incurred and not recovered by such a member of staff in such proceedings; and(c) any sum required in connection with the settlement of a claim that has or might have given rise to such proceedings.Disciplinary action etc9 Paragraph 2 does not affect the application of regulations under section 50 of the Police Act 1996 to the constable who occupies the office of chief constable.SCHEDULE 3	Section 3MAYOR'S OFFICE FOR POLICING AND CRIMEAllowances1 (1) The occupant of the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime is to be paid authorised allowances.(2) In this paragraph “authorised allowances” means allowances, in respect of expenses incurred by the occupant of the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime in the exercise of the functions of that Office, which are of the kinds and amounts designated by the Secretary of State as payable in accordance with this paragraph.(3) A determination under this paragraph may make different provision for different cases.(4) Payments under this paragraph are to be made by the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime.
164	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 3 – Mayor's Office for Policing and CrimeDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)Staff2 (1) The Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime must appoint a person to be the head of that Office's staff (referred to in this Part as the chief executive of the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime).(2) The Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime may appoint such other staff (in addition to the chief executive, and the chief finance officer appointed under section 127(2) of the Greater London Authority Act 1999) as the Office thinks appropriate to enable the Office to exercise its functions.(3) A reference in any enactment to the officers of a functional body of the Greater London Authority is, in the case of the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime, to be read as a reference to the staff of that Office.3 (1) The Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime must appoint a person to act as chief executive, if and for as long as—(a) that post is vacant, or(b) the holder of that post is, in the opinion of the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime, unable to carry out the duties of that post.(2) A reference in any enactment to the chief executive of the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime includes a reference to a person acting as chief executive in accordance with sub-paragraph (1).The Deputy Mayor for Policing and Crime4 (1) This paragraph applies to the person appointed under section 19 to be the Deputy Mayor for Policing and Crime.(2) None of the following may be appointed as the Deputy Mayor for Policing and Crime—(a) a person who has not attained the age of 18 on the day of appointment;(b) a person who is subject to a relevant disqualification;(c) a Member of the House of Commons;(d) a member of the European Parliament;(e) a member of the National Assembly for Wales;(f) a member of the Scottish Parliament;(g) a member of the Northern Ireland Assembly.(3) The terms and conditions of a person who is appointed as the Deputy Mayor for Policing and Crime must provide for the appointment to end not later than the day when the current term of office of the occupant of the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime ends.(2) 
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13) SCHEDULE 3 – Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)
165
(4) If, and for as long as, the person who is Deputy Mayor for Policing and Crime is a member of the London Assembly, the Deputy Mayor for Policing and Crime is not to be regarded as a member of staff of the Mayor's Office of Policing and Crime.(5) But sub-paragraph (4) does not prevent the person who is the Deputy Mayor for Policing and Crime from receiving allowances and gratuities under paragraph 6.(6) Section 7 of the Local Government and Housing Act 1989 (appointment of staff on merit) does not apply to the Deputy Mayor for Policing and Crime.(7) In this paragraph “current term of office”, in relation to the appointment of a member of staff by the occupant of the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime, means the occupant's term of office which is running at the time the appointment is made.(8) For the purposes of this paragraph, a person is subject to a relevant disqualification if the person is disqualified from being elected as, or being, a police and crime commissioner under—(a) section 65(1) (police officers, police-related employment etc), other than paragraph (e)(ii); or(b) section 66(1), (3)(a)(iii) or (iv), (3)(c) or (3)(d) (citizenship, bankruptcy, criminal convictions & corrupt or illegal election practices).Notification of appointments5 (1) This paragraph applies to every appointment of a member of staff of the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime.(2) The Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime must notify the London Assembly of—(a) the name of the person appointed;(b) the post to which the person has been appointed; and(c) the terms and conditions on which the person has been appointed.(3) In this paragraph, a reference to appointment of a person as a member of staff of the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime includes a reference to a person who is already a member of staff of the Office being appointed to a different post within the staff of the Office.Remuneration etc of staff6 (1) The Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime may pay remuneration, allowances and gratuities to the members of the staff of the Office.(2) The Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime may pay—(2) 
166	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 3 – Mayor's Office for Policing and CrimeDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)(a) pensions to, or in respect of, persons who have been members of the staff of the Office, and(b) amounts for or towards provision of pensions to, or in respect of, persons who have been members of the staff of the Office.(3) In this paragraph “allowances”, in relation to a member of the staff of the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime, means allowances in respect of expenses incurred by the member of staff in the course of employment as such a member of staff.Incidental powers7 (1) The Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime may do anything which is calculated to facilitate, or is conducive or incidental to, the exercise of the functions of the Office.(2) That includes—(a) entering into contracts and other agreements (whether legally binding or not);(b) acquiring and disposing of property (including land);(c) borrowing money.(3) This paragraph is subject to the other provisions of this Act and to any other enactment about the powers of the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime.Protection from personal liability8 (1) A person who is the occupant of the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime has no personal liability for an act or omission done by the person in the exercise of the functions of the office unless it is shown to have been done otherwise than in good faith.(2) A person who is a member of staff of the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime has no personal liability for an act or omission done by the person in the carrying out of duties as a member of staff unless it is shown to have been done otherwise than in good faith.Financial year9 (1) The first financial year of the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime is the period that—1 
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13) SCHEDULE 4 – Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)
167
(a) begins with the day on which section 3 comes into force, and(b) ends with the relevant 31 March.(2) After that, the financial year of the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime is the period of 12 months ending with 31 March.(3) In this paragraph “relevant 31 March”, in relation to the first financial year of the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime, means—(a) if that financial year begins on or before 1 October, the first 31 March that falls after the beginning of the financial year;(b) if that financial year begins after 1 October, the second 31 March that falls after the beginning of the financial year.SCHEDULE 4	Section 4COMMISSIONER OF POLICE OF THE METROPOLISCivilian staff1 (1) The Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis must appoint a person to be responsible for the proper administration of the metropolitan police force's financial affairs (referred to in this Part as the metropolitan police force's chief finance officer).(2) The Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis may appoint such other staff as the Commissioner thinks appropriate—(a) to enable the Commissioner to exercise the Commissioner's functions, or(b) otherwise to assist the metropolitan police force.(3) Section 113 of the Local Government Finance Act 1988 applies to the chief finance officer of the Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis as it applies to the persons having responsibility for the administration of financial affairs mentioned in that section.2 (1) The Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis must appoint a qualified person to act as chief finance officer, if and for as long as—(a) that post is vacant, or(a) 
168	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 4 – Commissioner of Police of the MetropolisDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)(b) the holder of that post is, in the Commissioner's opinion, unable to carry out the duties of that post.(2) For the purposes of sub-paragraph (1) a person is qualified to be appointed to act as chief finance officer if that person is qualified to be appointed to the post under paragraph 1.(3) A reference in any enactment to the metropolitan police force's chief finance officer includes a reference to a person acting as chief finance officer in accordance with sub-paragraph (1).Remuneration etc of staff3 (1) The Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis may pay remuneration, allowances and gratuities to the members of the metropolitan police force's civilian staff.(2) The Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis may pay—(a) pensions to, or in respect of, persons who have been members of the metropolitan police force's civilian staff, and(b) amounts for or towards provision of pensions to, or in respect of, persons who have been members of the metropolitan police force's civilian staff.(3) In this paragraph “allowances”, in relation to a member of a metropolitan police force's civilian staff, means allowances in respect of expenses incurred by the member of staff in the course of employment as such a member of staff.Incidental powers4 (1) The Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis may do anything which is calculated to facilitate, or is conducive or incidental to, the exercise of the functions of the Commissioner.(2) That includes—(a) entering into contracts and other agreements (whether legally binding or not), but only with the consent of the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime;(b) acquiring and disposing of property, apart from land, but only with the consent of the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime.F200(3) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .(4) Sub-paragraph (3) does not require the Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis to obtain the consent of the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime in order to enter into a contract or other agreement with a person—(2) 
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13) SCHEDULE 4 – Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)
169
(a) by virtue of which the person becomes, or is, a member of the metropolitan police force's civilian staff, or(b) which otherwise relates to the person's membership of that civilian staff (including the terms and conditions of the person's membership).(5) This paragraph is subject to the other provisions of this Act and to any other enactment about the powers of the Commissioner.[F201Financial arrangements etc4A  (1) The Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis may, by way of temporary loan or overdraft from a bank or otherwise, borrow sums temporarily required by the Commissioner, but only—(a) for the purpose of meeting expenses pending the receipt of revenues receivable by the Commissioner in respect of the period of account in which the expenses are chargeable,(b) in sterling, and(c) with the consent of the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime.(2) The Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis—(a) may not borrow money except as permitted by sub-paragraph (1);(b) may not enter into a credit arrangement.(3) The Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis may invest—(a) for any purpose relevant to the Commissioner's functions under any enactment, or(b) for the purpose of the prudent management of the Commissioner's financial affairs,but only with the consent of the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime.(4) The following provisions of Part 1 of the Local Government Act 2003 (capital finance etc and accounts), and any regulations made under them by the Secretary of State, apply in relation to the Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis as they apply in relation to a local authority in England—(a) section 6 (protection of lenders);(b) section 7 (meaning of “credit arrangements”);(c) sections 9 to 11 (capital receipts), except for section 11(2)(b) and (3) to (6);(a) 
170	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 4 – Commissioner of Police of the MetropolisDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)(d) section 13 (security for money borrowed etc);(e) section 14 (information);(f) section 15 (guidance);(g) section 16 (meaning of “capital expenditure”);(h) section 17 (external funds);(i) section 18 (companies etc), ignoring any reference to a Passenger Transport Executive;(j) section 20 (directions);(k) sections 21 and 22 (accounts).(5) Any of those provisions, or regulations made under them by the Secretary of State, that apply for the purposes of Chapter 1 of Part 1 of the Local Government Act 2003 apply also (so far as relevant) for the purposes of sub-paragraphs (1) to (3).(6) An order under section 217 of the Local Government and Public Involvement in Health Act 2007, as it has effect for the purposes of section 18(2)(b) of the Local Government Act 2003 as applied by sub-paragraph (4)(i), applies—(a) with the substitution of a reference to the Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis for a reference to a local authority, and(b) with any other necessary modifications.]Damages and costs in legal proceedings5 (1) The following amounts must be paid out of the police fund kept by the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime—(a) any damages or costs awarded against the Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis in any proceedings brought against the Commissioner in respect of the acts or omissions of a member of the metropolitan police force's civilian staff;(b) any costs incurred by the Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis in any such proceedings so far as not recovered by the Commissioner in the proceedings; and(c) any sum required in connection with the settlement of any claim made against the Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis in respect of the acts or omissions of a member of the metropolitan police force's civilian staff, if the settlement is approved by the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime.(2) The Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime may, in such cases and to such extent as appear to the Office to be appropriate, pay out of the police fund kept by the Office—(a) any damages or costs awarded against a member of the metropolitan police force's civilian staff in proceedings for any unlawful conduct of that person;(b) any costs incurred and not recovered by such a member of staff in such proceedings; and(c) any sum required in connection with the settlement of a claim that has or might have given rise to such proceedings.(a) 
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13) SCHEDULE 5 – Issuing preceptsDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)
171
Disciplinary action etc6 Section 4(1) does not affect the application of regulations under section 50 of the Police Act 1996 to the constable who occupies the office of Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis.SCHEDULE 5	Section 26ISSUING PRECEPTSIntroduction1 (1) A police and crime commissioner may not issue a precept under section 40 of the Local Government Finance Act 1992 for a financial year until the end of the scrutiny process is reached.(2) The end of the scrutiny process is reached when—(a) in a case where paragraph 5 applies, the police and crime commissioner gives the police and crime panel a response to the panel's report; or(b) in a case where paragraph 6 applies, the end of the process is reached in accordance with regulations under paragraph 8.(3) References in this Schedule to the issuing of a precept include references to the issuing of a substitute precept.(2) 
172	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 5 – Issuing preceptsDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)Commissioner to notify panel of proposed precept2 The police and crime commissioner must notify the relevant police and crime panel of the precept which the commissioner is proposing to issue for the financial year (the “proposed precept”).Panel to review proposed precept3 (1) The police and crime panel must review the proposed precept notified to it under paragraph 2.(2) The panel must make a report to the commissioner on the proposed precept.(3) The report may include recommendations, including recommendations as to the precept that should be issued for the financial year.Panel's power to veto precept4 (1) The police and crime panel may, having reviewed the proposed precept, veto the proposed precept.(2) If the panel vetoes the proposed precept, the report made under paragraph 3 must include a statement that the panel has vetoed it.(3) References in this Schedule to a police and crime panel vetoing a proposed precept are references to the panel making a decision, by the required majority, that the proposed precept should not be the precept for the financial year.(4) For that purpose, the panel makes that decision by the required majority if at least two-thirds of the persons who are members of the panel at the time when the decision is made vote in favour of making that decision.
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13) SCHEDULE 5 – Issuing preceptsDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)
173
Next steps if no veto5 (1) This paragraph applies if the police and crime panel does not veto the proposed precept.(2) The police and crime commissioner must—(a) have regard to the report made by the panel under paragraph 3 (including any recommendations in the report),(b) give the panel a response to the report (and any such recommendations), and(c) publish the response.(3) The police and crime commissioner may—(a) issue the proposed precept as the precept for the financial year, or(b) issue a different precept, but only if it would be in accordance with a recommendation made in the report to do so.(4) It is for the police and crime panel to determine the manner in which a response to a report or recommendations is to be published in accordance with sub-paragraph (2) (c).Next steps if veto6 (1) This paragraph applies if the police and crime panel vetoes the proposed precept.(2) The police and crime commissioner must not issue the proposed precept as the precept for the financial year.(3) The police and crime commissioner must—(a) have regard to the report made by the panel under paragraph 3 (including any recommendations in the report),(b) give the panel a response to the report (and any such recommendations), and(c) publish the response.(4) It is for the police and crime panel to determine the manner in which a response to a report or recommendations is to be published in accordance with sub-paragraph (3) (c).(5) Sub-paragraph (2) is subject to regulations under paragraph 8.(2) 
174	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 5 – Issuing preceptsDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)Regulations7 (1) The Secretary of State may make regulations about—(a) the steps that are required to be taken by paragraphs 2 to 6, and(b) procedures that are to be followed in taking such steps.(2) The regulations may, in particular, make provision about the time limits applicable in taking steps or following procedures.8 (1) The Secretary of State may make regulations about the issuing of precepts in cases where paragraph 6 applies.(2) The regulations may make provision about—(a) steps to be taken, and(b) procedures to be followed.(3) That includes provision about the time limits applicable in taking steps or following procedures.(4) The regulations may make provision about limits on the precept that may be issued.(5) That includes provision about the calculation of limits by reference to—(a) one or more previous precepts,(b) the proposed precept, or(c) any other matters.(6) The regulations may confer functions on—(a) police and crime commissioners,(b) police and crime panels,(c) the Secretary of State, or(d) any other person.(7) That includes functions involving the exercise of a discretion.(8) Sub-paragraphs (2) to (7) do not limit the power conferred by sub-paragraph (1).
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13) SCHEDULE 6 – Police and crime panelsDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)
175
SCHEDULE 6	Section 28POLICE AND CRIME PANELSPART 1TYPE OF PANEL WHICH POLICE AREA IS TO HAVEEngland1 (1) Each police area in England, other than the metropolitan police district, is to have a police and crime panel established and maintained in accordance with Part 2 of this Schedule.(2) But the Secretary of State may, by order, provide that any such police area is to have (for as long as the order has effect) a police and crime panel established and maintained in accordance with Part 3 of this Schedule (instead of a panel established and maintained in accordance with Part 2).(3) The Secretary of State may make an order under sub-paragraph (2) in relation to a single-authority police area only if the Secretary of State is of the opinion that the relevant local authority has failed to nominate or appoint one or more of its councillors as members of the panel in accordance with paragraphs 6 and 9.(4) The Secretary of State may make an order under sub-paragraph (2) in relation to a multi-authority police area only if the Secretary of State is of the opinion that all the relevant local authorities have (whether at the same time or at different times) failed to nominate or appoint one or more of their councillors as members of the panel—(a) in accordance with paragraphs 7 and 9 (in the case of a police area which covers ten or more local authorities), or(b) in accordance with paragraphs 8 and 9 (in the case of a police area which covers nine or fewer local authorities).
176	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 6 – Police and crime panelsDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)Wales2 Each police area in Wales is to have a police and crime panel established and maintained in accordance with Part 3 of this Schedule.PART 2PANELS ESTABLISHED BY LOCAL AUTHORITIESEstablishment and maintenance of panels3 (1) This Part of this Schedule applies in relation to each police area in England (other than the metropolitan police district), unless an order under paragraph 1(2) has effect in relation to the police area.(2) The local authority or local authorities which such a police area covers must—(a) establish and maintain a police and crime panel for the police area, and(b) make the panel arrangements (see paragraph 24) for the police and crime panel.(3) In the case of a multi-authority police area, all the relevant local authorities must agree to the making or modification of the panel arrangements.(4) In the following provisions of this Part of this Schedule, a reference to a police and crime panel is a reference to a panel established and maintained in accordance with this paragraph.Membership and status4 (1) A police and crime panel for a police area is to consist of the following members—(a) the relevant number of persons properly appointed as members of the panel; and(b) the appropriate number of members co-opted by the panel.(2) For the purposes of sub-paragraph (1)(a), the “relevant number” is—(a) ten (if the police area covers ten or fewer local authorities); or(b) the number that is equal to the number of local authorities which the police area covers (if the police area covers eleven or more local authorities).(a) 
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13) SCHEDULE 6 – Police and crime panelsDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)
177
(3) For the purposes of sub-paragraph (1)(b), the “appropriate number” is—(a) two, or(b) if a resolution of the panel under sub-paragraph (4) is in force, the number of co-opted members specified in that resolution.(4) A police and crime panel may resolve that the panel is to have the number of co-opted members specified in the resolution; but no such resolution may be passed unless—(a) that number of co-opted members is greater than two;(b) the Secretary of State agrees that the panel should have that number of co- opted members; and(c) the total membership of the panel, including that number of co-opted members, would not exceed 20.(5) A police and crime panel is—(a) a committee of the relevant local authority (if it is the panel for a single- authority police area), or(b) a joint committee of the relevant local authorities (if it is the panel for a multi-authority police area).F202(6) A police and crime panel may not exercise any functions other than those conferred by this Act [F202or by, or by virtue of, the Fire and Rescue Services Act 2004.]Persons properly appointed as members of panels5 (1) In this Part of this Schedule, a reference to a person properly appointed as a member of a police and crime panel is a reference to—(a) a person nominated by a relevant local authority to be a member of the panel, and appointed by the authority as a member of the panel, in accordance with paragraphs 6 and 9, paragraphs 7 and 9, or paragraphs 8 and 9, or(b) a person nominated by the Secretary of State to be a member of the panel, and appointed by the Secretary of State as a member of the panel, in accordance with paragraph 10.(2) In the case of the police and crime panel for a multi-authority police area which covers nine or fewer local authorities, the panel arrangements must make provision(2) 
178	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 6 – Police and crime panelsDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)as to the relevant local authority or authorities who are to have power to appoint the extra members of the panel (see paragraph 8(3)(b)).(3) For that purpose “extra members” means the number of members of the panel produced by this calculation—where L is the number of local authorities which the police area covers.Single-authority police area: nomination by local authority6 (1) This paragraph applies in relation to the police and crime panel for a single-authority police area.(2) If the number of appointed members of the police and crime panel is less than the full complement, the relevant local authority may nominate the appropriate number of its councillors to be members of the police and crime panel.(3) A relevant local authority may not make a nomination under this paragraph if, and for as long as, a notice given to the authority by the Secretary of State under paragraph 10(8) is in force.(4) In this paragraph—  “appropriate number” means the number that is equal to the difference between—(a) the full complement; and(b) the number of appointed members of the panel; “full complement” means ten members.Police area covering ten or more local authorities: nomination by local authority7 (1) This paragraph applies in relation to the police and crime panel for a police area which covers ten or more local authorities.(2) In a case where—(a) the number of appointed members of the police and crime panel is less than the full complement, and(b) there is no member of the panel who was appointed by a particular relevant local authority,(a) 
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13) SCHEDULE 6 – Police and crime panelsDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)
179
the authority may nominate one of its councillors to be a member of the police and crime panel.(3) A relevant local authority may not make a nomination under this paragraph if, and for as long as, a notice given to the authority by the Secretary of State under paragraph 10(8) is in force.(4) In this paragraph, “full complement” means the number of appointed members which the panel is to have by virtue of paragraph 4(1)(a).Multi-authority police area covering nine or fewer local authorities: nomination by local authority8 (1) This paragraph applies in relation to the police and crime panel for a multi-authority police area which covers nine or fewer local authorities.(2) In a case where—(a) the number of appointed members of the police and crime panel is less than the full complement,(b) a particular relevant local authority does not have power under the panel arrangements to appoint an extra member of the panel (see paragraph 5(2)), and(c) there is no member of the panel who was appointed by the authority,the authority may nominate one of its councillors to be a member of the police and crime panel.(3) In a case where—(a) the number of appointed members of the police and crime panel is less than the full complement,(b) a particular relevant local authority has power under the panel arrangements to appoint one or more extra members of the panel (see paragraph 5(2)), and(c) the number of members of the panel who are members by virtue of appointment by the authority is less than the authority's quota of members,the authority may nominate the permitted number of its councillors to be members of the police and crime panel.(4) A relevant local authority may not make a nomination under this paragraph if, and for as long as, a notice given to the authority by the Secretary of State under paragraph 10(8) is in force.(5) In this paragraph, in relation to a police and crime panel and a relevant local authority—“full complement” means ten members;  “permitted number” means the number that is equal to the difference between—(a) the authority's quota of members; and(b) the number of members of the panel who are members by virtue of appointment by the authority;(a) 
180	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 6 – Police and crime panelsDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)  “quota of members” means the number of members calculated by adding one to the number of extra members of the panel which the authority has power to appoint under the panel arrangements (see paragraph 5(2)).Appointment after nomination by local authority9 (1) This paragraph applies where a relevant local authority makes a nomination under paragraph 6, 7 or 8.(2) If the nominee accepts the nomination, the relevant local authority may appoint the nominated councillor as a member of the panel.(3) If the nominee does not accept the nomination, the relevant local authority may nominate another of its councillors to be a member of the police and crime panel (and sub-paragraph (2) or this sub-paragraph applies accordingly, as if the nomination were made under paragraph 6, 7 or 8).  Failure of local authority to appoint member: nomination and appointment by Secretary of State10 (1) This paragraph applies if the Secretary of State is satisfied that—(a) the number of appointed members of a police and crime panel is less than the full complement, and(b) a relevant local authority (the “defaulting local authority”)—(i) has failed to nominate or appoint one or more of its councillors as members of the panel in accordance with paragraphs 6 and 9, paragraphs 7 and 9, or paragraphs 8 and 9, or(ii) does not have power to make such a nomination and appointment because of paragraph 6(3), 7(3) or 8(4).(2) The Secretary of State must nominate the appropriate number of persons who are councillors of relevant local authorities to be members of the police and crime panel.(3) Sub-paragraph (4) or (5) applies in relation to each nomination which the Secretary of State is required to make under sub-paragraph (2).(4) If the nominee accepts the nomination, the Secretary of State must appoint the nominated councillor as a member of the panel.(5) If the nominee does not accept the nomination, the Secretary of State must nominate another person who is a councillor of a relevant local authority to be a member of the police and crime panel (and sub-paragraph (4) or this sub-paragraph applies accordingly, as if the nomination were made under sub-paragraph (2)).(2) 
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13) SCHEDULE 6 – Police and crime panelsDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)
181
(6) In complying with this paragraph in relation to the police and crime panel for a multi-authority police area, the Secretary of State must secure (as far as is reasonably practicable) that the fair representation objective is met.(7) The “fair representation objective” referred to in sub-paragraph (6) is—(a) in the case of a police area which covers ten or more local authorities, the objective that each relevant local authority has only one of its councillors as a member of the panel;(b) in the case of a police area which covers nine or fewer local authorities, the objective that each relevant local authority has at least one of its councillors as a member of the panel.(8) If the Secretary of State—(a) is satisfied that a relevant local authority has failed to nominate or appoint one or more of its councillors as members of the panel as mentioned in sub- paragraph (1) (b), and(b) is considering whether to exercise, has decided to exercise, or has exercised, the power under this paragraph to make a nomination,the Secretary of State may give the authority notice that the Secretary of State is satisfied as mentioned in paragraph (a) of this sub-paragraph.(9) A notice given under sub-paragraph (8) may be withdrawn by the Secretary of State at any time.(10) For the purposes of sub-paragraph (1) (b) (i), it is irrelevant that a relevant local authority which has failed to nominate or appoint a councillor as a member of the panel—(a) may have power under any of paragraphs 6 to 9 to make a further nomination; or(b) is complying with, or has complied with, the panel arrangements relating to that panel.(11) In this paragraph—  “appropriate number” means the number that is equal to the difference between—(a) the full complement; and(b) the number of appointed members of the panel;  “full complement” means the number of appointed members which the panel is to have by virtue of paragraph 4(1)(a).Costs of the panel11 (1) This paragraph applies to a multi-authority panel.(2) The panel arrangements must make provision about—(a) how the relevant local authorities are to meet the costs of the panel; and(a) 
182	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 6 – Police and crime panelsDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)(b) insofar as the provision is necessary, how funds paid (whether by the Secretary of State or otherwise) to meet the costs of the panel are to be paid to, or distributed between, the relevant local authorities.PART 3PANELS ESTABLISHED BY THE SECRETARY OF STATEEstablishment and maintenance of panels12 (1) This Part of this Schedule applies in relation to—(a) each police area in Wales, and(b) each police area in England in relation to which an order under paragraph 1(2) has effect.(2) The Secretary of State must—(a) establish and maintain a separate police and crime panel for each police area to which this Part of this Schedule applies, and(b) make the panel arrangements (see paragraph 24) for each police and crime panel established and maintained in accordance with this paragraph.(3) The Secretary of State may make different panel arrangements for different police and crime panels.(4) In the following provisions of this Part of this Schedule, a reference to a police and crime panel is a reference to a panel established and maintained in accordance with this paragraph.Membership and status13 (1) A police and crime panel for a police area is to consist of the following members—(a) the relevant number of persons appointed by the Secretary of State as members of the panel; and(b) the appropriate number of members co-opted by the panel.(2) For the purposes of sub-paragraph (1) (a), the “relevant number” is—(a) ten (if the police area covers ten or fewer local authorities); or(b) the number that is equal to the number of local authorities which the police area covers (if the police area covers eleven or more local authorities).(3) For the purposes of sub-paragraph (1)(b), the “appropriate number” is—(a) two, or(a) 
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13) SCHEDULE 6 – Police and crime panelsDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)
183
(b) if a resolution of the panel under sub-paragraph (4) is in force, the number of co-opted members specified in that resolution.(4) A police and crime panel may resolve that the panel is to have the number of co-opted members specified in the resolution; but no such resolution may be passed unless—(a) that number of co-opted members is greater than two;(b) the Secretary of State agrees that the panel should have that number of co- opted members; and(c) the total membership of the panel, including that number of co-opted members, would not exceed 20.(5) A police and crime panel is not a committee or joint committee of any local authority or local authorities.Wales: persons appointed by the Secretary of State as members of panels14 In this Part of this Schedule, a reference to a person appointed by the Secretary of State as a member of a Welsh police and crime panel is a reference to—(a) a person nominated by a relevant local authority to be a member of the panel, and appointed by the Secretary of State as a member of the panel, in accordance with paragraph 16 (2) to (4)(a), or(b) a person nominated by the Secretary of State to be a member of the panel, and appointed by the Secretary of State as a member of the panel, in accordance with paragraph 16 (4)(b) to (6).Wales: Secretary of State to ask local authorities to nominate members of panels15 (1) This paragraph applies in relation to a Welsh police and crime panel if the Secretary of State is satisfied that the number of appointed members of the panel is less than the full complement.(2) In the case of a police and crime panel for a single-authority police area, the Secretary of State must ask the relevant local authority to nominate the appropriate number of the authority's councillors to be members of the panel.(3) In the case of a police and crime panel for a multi-authority police area, the Secretary of State must—(a) decide which of the relevant local authorities to ask to make nominations under this sub-paragraph (the “nominating authorities”);(b) decide what number of nominations under this sub-paragraph each nominating authority is to be asked to make; and(c) ask each nominating authority to nominate that number of the authority's councillors to be members of the panel.(a) 
184	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 6 – Police and crime panelsDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)(4) In complying with sub-paragraph (3), the Secretary of State must secure—(a) that the number of nominations which the nominating authority or authorities are asked to make (when taken together) is equal to the appropriate number; and(b) that (as far as is reasonably practicable) the fair representation objective is met.(5) The “fair representation objective” referred to in sub-paragraph (4)(b) is—(a) in the case of a police area which covers ten or more local authorities, the objective that each relevant local authority has only one of its councillors as a member of the panel;(b) in the case of a police area which covers nine or fewer local authorities, the objective that each relevant local authority has at least one of its councillors as a member of the panel.(6) In this paragraph—  “appropriate number” means the number that is equal to the difference between—(a) the full complement; and(b) the number of appointed members of the panel;  “full complement” means the number of appointed members which the panel is to have by virtue of paragraph 13(1)(a).Wales: consequences of Secretary of State asking local authorities to make nominations16 (1) This paragraph applies if, under paragraph 15, the Secretary of State asks a relevant local authority to nominate a councillor to be a member of a Welsh police and crime panel.(2) The authority may make the nomination.(3) If the authority makes the nomination, and the nominee accepts the nomination, the Secretary of State must appoint the nominated councillor as a member of the police and crime panel.(4) If the authority fails to make the nomination, or the nominee does not accept the nomination, the Secretary of State must either—(a) ask the authority to make another nomination (and sub-paragraph (2), and sub-paragraph (3) or this sub-paragraph, apply accordingly, as if the request were made under paragraph 15); or(b) nominate a person who is a councillor of a relevant local authority to be a member of the police and crime panel.(5) If the nominee accepts a nomination made under sub-paragraph (4)(b), the Secretary of State must appoint the nominated councillor as a member of the panel.(6) If the nominee does not accept the nomination, the Secretary of State must nominate another person who is a councillor of a relevant local authority to be a member(2) 
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13) SCHEDULE 6 – Police and crime panelsDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)
185
of the police and crime panel (and sub-paragraph (5) or this sub-paragraph applies accordingly, as if the nomination were made under sub-paragraph (4)(b)).England: persons appointed by the Secretary of State as members of panels17 In this Part of this Schedule, a reference to a person appointed by the Secretary of State as a member of an English police and crime panel is a reference to a person who has been appointed by the Secretary of State as a member of the panel in accordance with paragraph 18.England: nomination and appointment of members of panels by Secretary of State18 (1) This paragraph applies in relation to an English police and crime panel if the Secretary of State is satisfied that the number of appointed members of the panel is less than the full complement.(2) The Secretary of State must nominate the appropriate number of persons who are councillors of relevant local authorities to be members of the police and crime panel.(3) Sub-paragraph (4) or (5) applies in relation to each nomination which the Secretary of State is required to make under sub-paragraph (2).(4) If the nominee accepts the nomination, the Secretary of State must appoint the nominated councillor as a member of the panel.(5) If the nominee does not accept the nomination, the Secretary of State must nominate another person who is a councillor of a relevant local authority to be a member of the police and crime panel (and sub-paragraph (4) or this sub-paragraph applies accordingly, as if the nomination were made under sub-paragraph (2)).(6) In this paragraph—  “appropriate number” means the number that is equal to the difference between—(a) the full complement; and(b) the number of appointed members of the panel;  “full complement” means the number of appointed members which the panel is to have by virtue of paragraph 13(1)(a).  
186	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 6 – Police and crime panelsDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)Liabilities of panels19 (1) All relevant liabilities relating to a police and crime panel are liabilities of the Secretary of State (and accordingly are not liabilities of any member of the panel).(2) Any expense incurred by a member of a police and crime panel—(a) in respect of a relevant liability, or  (b) otherwise in the exercise of, or purported exercise of, a function of the panel, is to be borne and repaid by the Secretary of State.(3) In this paragraph “relevant liability” means a liability which, but for this paragraph, would be a liability of a member of a police and crime panel (whether personally or as a member of that panel) in respect of anything done by—(a) that person in the exercise, or purported exercise, of a function of a member of the panel,(b) any other member of the panel in the exercise, or purported exercise, of a function of a member of the panel, or(c) the panel in the exercise, or purported exercise, of a function of the panel.Provision of financial and other resources20 (1) The Secretary of State may provide financial and other resources—(a) to a police and crime panel in connection with the exercise of the panel's functions;(b) to the members of a police and crime panel in connection with the exercise of their functions; and(c) to one or more of the relevant local authorities covered by a police area in connection with the exercise of functions by—(i) such an authority in relation to the police and crime panel for that police area,(ii) that panel, or(iii) the members of that panel.(2) The Secretary of State may provide financial or other resources under sub- paragraph (1) subject to conditions.(3) In the case of resources provided under sub-paragraph (1) (c), the conditions which may be imposed include conditions requiring a relevant local authority to pass resources to, or share resources with, another relevant local authority.(4) The power under this paragraph to provide resources is in addition to the duty under paragraph 19(2).(2) 
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13) SCHEDULE 6 – Police and crime panelsDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)PART 4GENERAL PROVISIONS
187
Restrictions on membership of panel21 The police and crime commissioner for a police area may not be a member of the police and crime panel for the area.22[F203(1)] A person may not be a co-opted member of the police and crime panel for a police area if the person is any of the following—(a) a member of the staff of the police and crime commissioner for that police area;(b) a member of the civilian staff of the police force for that police area;(c) a Member of Parliament;(d) a member of the National Assembly for Wales;(e) a member of the Scottish Parliament;(f) a member of the European Parliament.[F204(2) Sub-paragraph (3) applies (as well as sub-paragraph (1)) in relation to a police and crime panel for a police area which, under or by virtue of the Fire and Rescue Services Act 2004, exercises functions in relation to a fire and rescue authority.(3) A person may not be a co-opted member of the panel if the person is—(a) a member of staff of the fire and rescue authority, or(b) if an order under section 4H of that Act is in force in relation to that authority, a member of staff of the chief constable of the police force for the police area who has been—(i) transferred to the chief constable under a scheme made under subsection 4I(1) of that Act, or(ii) appointed by the chief constable under section 4I(4) of that Act.]
188	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 6 – Police and crime panelsDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)23 (1) If the police and crime panel for a police area has two co-opted members, a member of a local authority which is covered by that police area may not be a co-opted member of that panel.(2) If the police and crime panel for a police area has three or more co-opted members, a member of a local authority which is covered by that police area may be a co- opted member of that panel only if at least two of the other co-opted members are not members of any such local authority.Panel arrangements24 (1) Panel arrangements are arrangements for the establishment and maintenance of a police and crime panel.(2) Panel arrangements must make provision about the co-option of, and holding of office by, the co-opted members of the police and crime panel.(3) Panel arrangements must include provision about—(a) the term of office of appointed members and co-opted members of the panel;(b) resignation, and removal, of appointed members and co-opted members of the panel;(c) conditions for re-appointment of appointed members and co-opted members of the panel.(4) Panel arrangements may not make rules of procedure for the police and crime panel (as to which see paragraph 25).(5) Panel arrangements may make different provision for different cases.(6) The following persons must comply with the panel arrangements relating to a police and crime panel—(a) each relevant local authority;(b) each member of the police and crime panel.Rules of procedure25 (1) A police and crime panel must make rules of procedure for the panel.23 
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13) SCHEDULE 6 – Police and crime panelsDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)
189
(2) A police and crime panel's rules of procedure must make provision about the appointment, resignation and removal of a person to chair the panel.(3) The police and crime panel's rules of procedure may, in particular, make provision about—(a) the method of making decisions, and(b) the formation of sub-committees.(4) A sub-committee of a police and crime panel may not co-opt members.(5) This paragraph is subject to paragraph 27.Voting by members26 All members of a police and crime panel may vote in proceedings of the panel.Exercise of special functions27 (1) The special functions of a police and crime panel may not be discharged by a committee or sub-committee of the panel.(2) In this paragraph “special functions” means the functions conferred on a police and crime panel by—(a) section 28(3) (scrutiny of police and crime plan);(b) section 28(4) (scrutiny of annual report);(c) paragraphs 10 and 11 of Schedule 1;(d) Schedule 5 (issuing precepts); and(e) Part 1 of Schedule 8 (scrutiny of appointment of chief constables).[F205(3) The references in sub-paragraph (2) to section 28(3) and (4) and Schedule 5 include those provisions as applied in relation to a fire and rescue authority by virtue of Schedule A2 to the Fire and Rescue Services Act 2004.]
190	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 6 – Police and crime panelsDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)Allowances28 The panel arrangements may make provision about the payment of allowances to members of the police and crime panel.Promotion of, and support, for panels29 The panel arrangements must make provision for—(a) the role of the police and crime panel to be promoted;(b) administrative and other support to be given to the police and crime panel and its members;(c) support and guidance to be given to—(i) members of relevant local authorities,(ii) members of the executives (if any) of relevant local authorities, and(iii) officers of relevant local authorities,in relation to the functions of the police and crime panel.Validity of proceedings30 The validity of the proceedings of a police and crime panel is not affected by a vacancy in the membership of the panel or a defect in appointment.Duty to produce balanced panel31 (1) In exercising functions under Part 2 or 3 of this Schedule, a relevant local authority must secure that (as far as is reasonably practicable) the balanced appointment objective is met.23 
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13) SCHEDULE 6 – Police and crime panelsDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)
191
(2) In exercising functions under Part 2 or 3 of this Schedule, the Secretary of State must secure that (as far as is reasonably practicable) the balanced appointment objective is met.(3) A police and crime panel must, in co-opting persons who are members of relevant local authorities, secure that (as far is reasonably practicable) the balanced appointment objective is met.(4) A police and crime panel—(a) must, from time to time, decide whether the panel's exercise of the power conferred by paragraph 4(4) or 13(4) (changing the number of co-opted members of the panel) would enable the balanced appointment objective to be, or would contribute to that objective being, met or more effectively met; and(b) if the panel decides that the exercise of the power would do so, must exercise that power accordingly.(5) The “balanced appointment objective” referred to in this paragraph is the objective that local authority members of a police and crime panel (when taken together)—(a) represent all parts of the relevant police area;(b) represent the political make-up of—(i) the relevant local authority, or(ii) the relevant local authorities (when taken together);(c) have the skills, knowledge and experience necessary for the police and crime panel to discharge its functions effectively.(6) For that purpose “local authority members” means—(a) appointed members of the police and crime panel, and(b) co-opted members of the panel who are members of relevant local authorities.32 In co-opting members who are not members of relevant local authorities, a police and crime panel must secure that (as far as is reasonably practicable) the appointed and co-opted members of the panel (when taken together) have the skills, knowledge and experience necessary for the police and crime panel to discharge its functions effectively.
192	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 6 – Police and crime panelsDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)[F206Duty to produce panel with fire and rescue expertise32A	(1) Sub-paragraph (2) applies in relation to a police and crime panel for a police area if—(a) a fire and rescue authority is created by an order under section 4A of the Fire and Rescue Services Act 2004, and(b) the area of the fire and rescue authority is the same as, or falls within, the police area.(2) Each person listed in sub-paragraph (3)—(a) must consider whether the person could exercise a function conferred on the person by or by virtue of this Schedule to enable the fire and rescue expertise objective to be met or to contribute to that objective being met, and(b) if the person considers that the person could exercise such a function to that end, must do so.(3) Those persons are—(a) the panel,(b) a relevant local authority, and(c) the Secretary of State.(4) The “fire and rescue expertise objective” referred to in this paragraph is the objective that members of the panel (when taken together) have the skills, knowledge and experience necessary for the panel effectively to discharge its functions in relation to the fire and rescue authority.]Duty to nominate elected mayor to be a member of the panel33 (1) This paragraph applies if—(a) a local authority has a mayor and cabinet executive, and(b) the elected mayor of that executive is not a member of the relevant police and crime panel.(2) If the relevant local authority has power under paragraph 6(2), 7(2), 8(2) or (3) or 16(2) to nominate one or more of its councillors to be members of that panel, any exercise of that power must be such as to secure that the elected mayor is the councillor, or one of the councillors, so nominated.(2) 
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13) SCHEDULE 6 – Police and crime panelsDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)
193
(3) If the Secretary of State is required by paragraph 10(2), 16(4)(b) or 18(2) to nominate one or more persons to be members of that panel, the Secretary of State must secure that the elected mayor is the person, or one of the persons, so nominated.(4) The duty in sub-paragraph (2) or (3) does not apply at a particular time if the person who holds office as the elected mayor at that time (the “current mayor”)—(a) has, since the start of the current mayoral term, already been nominated to be a member of that panel (whether by the relevant local authority or the Secretary of State), and(b) did not become a member of that panel by virtue of the nomination.(5) But sub-paragraph (4) does not prevent the exercise of a power under this Schedule so as to make a further nomination of the current mayor to be a member of that panel.34 (1) This paragraph applies if—(a) a local authority has a mayor and cabinet executive,(b) under paragraph 6(2), 7(2), 8(2) or (3) or 16(2) the local authority nominates the person who holds office as elected mayor of the executive at that time (the “current mayor”) to be a member of the relevant police and crime panel,(c) that is the first such nomination of the current mayor since the start of the current mayoral term, and(d) the current mayor does not become a member of that panel by virtue of the nomination.(2) The Secretary of State may not, by virtue of that failure of the current mayor to become a member of the police and crime panel, nominate a person to be a member of that panel under paragraph 10(2) or 16(4)(b).35 (1) This paragraph applies for the purposes of paragraphs 33 and 34 and this paragraph.23 
194	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 6 – Police and crime panelsDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)(2) A reference to the start of the current mayoral term of a person who is the elected mayor of the executive of a local authority is a reference to the time when that person—(a) took office as elected mayor of that executive (if that person has been so elected on only one occasion), or(b) most recently took office as elected mayor of that executive (if that person has been so elected on two or more occasions).(3) The “relevant police and crime panel”, in relation to a local authority, is the police and crime panel for the police area which covers that authority.(4) The expressions “elected mayor” and “mayor and cabinet executive” have the same meanings as in Part 2 of the Local Government Act 2000.Application of other legislation36 (1) The Secretary of State may, by regulations—(a) amend or otherwise modify any local authority enactment in its application to police and crime panels or members of police and crime panels, and(b) apply any local authority enactment (with or without modifications) to police and crime panels or members of police and crime panels if, or to the extent that, it does not so apply.(2) In this paragraph “local authority enactment” means an enactment which relates to—(a) local authorities or committees or joint committees of local authorities, or(b) members of such authorities, committees or joint committees.Regulations about notifications37 The Secretary of State may, by regulations, make provision about notifications to be given by persons in relation to—(a) their compliance, or failure to comply, with any duty imposed under this Schedule; or(b) their exercise, or failure to exercise, any power conferred under this Schedule.(a) 
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13) SCHEDULE 6 – Police and crime panelsDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)
195
Regulations about making nominations38 (1) The Secretary of State may, by regulations, make provision about—(a) the making of nominations (including provision about when nominations lapse);(b) the notification of nominations (whether to the nominee or any other person); and(c) the acceptance and refusal of nominations (including provision about when nominations are to be treated as having been accepted or refused).(2) In this paragraph “nomination” means a nomination by a relevant local authority or the Secretary of State of a person to be a member of a police and crime panel.Regulations about making appointments39 (1) The Secretary of State may, by regulations, make provision about—(a) the making of appointments;(b) the notification of appointments (whether to the appointee or any other person); and(c) the termination of appointments (including provision about when appointments are to be treated as having been terminated).(2) In this paragraph “appointment” means—(a) the appointment by a relevant local authority or the Secretary of State of a person as a member of a police and crime panel, and(b) the co-option by a police and crime panel of a person to be a member of the panel.Regulations about modification etc of functions40 (1) The Secretary of State may, by regulations, make provision for modifying, suspending, transferring or removing relevant functions insofar as they are exercisable in relation to police and crime panels in respect of which the Secretary of State is, or has been, required to nominate members.(2) In this paragraph, “relevant functions” means functions conferred on relevant local authorities or the Secretary of State by this Schedule.(2) 
196	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 6 – Police and crime panelsDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)Interpretation41 (1) A reference in this Schedule to a police area which covers a local authority is a reference to a police area whose area is the same as, or includes, all or part of the local authority's area.(2) The circumstances in which a relevant local authority may be taken, for the purposes of this Schedule, to have failed to nominate or appoint a councillor as a member of a police and crime panel include circumstances where a councillor who is nominated and appointed fails to remain as a member of the panel for such a period as the Secretary of State considers reasonable.(3) In this Schedule—  “appointed member” means a member of a police and crime panel by virtue of paragraph 4(1)(a) or 13(1)(a);  “co-opted member” means a member of a police and crime panel by virtue of paragraph 4(1)(b) or 13(1)(b);“councillor”, in relation to a local authority, means a person who—(a) is a member of the local authority, or(b) is the elected mayor of a mayor and cabinet executive (within the meaning of Part 2 of the Local Government Act 2000) of a relevant local authority;  “English police and crime panel” means a police and crime panel for a police area in England;“local authority” means—(a) in relation to England, a county council or a district council;(b) in relation to Wales, a county council or a county borough council; “multi-authority police area” means a police area which covers two ormore local authorities;  “panel arrangements” means the arrangements referred to in paragraph 24;  “relevant local authority”, in relation to a police area, means a local authority which the police area covers;  “single-authority police area” means a police area which covers only one local authority;  “Welsh police and crime panel” means a police and crime panel for a police area in Wales.
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13) SCHEDULE 7 – Regulations about complaints and conduct matters Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)
197
F207SCHEDULE 7	Section 31REGULATIONS ABOUT COMPLAINTS AND CONDUCT MATTERSIntroduction1 (1) In this Schedule—“conduct matter” has the same meaning as in section 31;  “police force” means a police force maintained for a police area in England or Wales or any other police force which exercises functions in England or Wales;“qualifying complaint” has the same meaning as in section 31; “regulations” means regulations under section 31.(2) The provisions of this Schedule that confer power to make particular kinds of regulations do not affect the generality of the power conferred by section 31.Investigation of serious complaints2 (1) This paragraph applies to—(a) serious complaints, and(b) conduct matters,which relate to any relevant office holder.(2) Regulations must provide for serious complaints and conduct matters to be investigated—(a) by the [F207Director General of the Independent Office for Police Conduct], or(b) by a police force, in an investigation that is under the management of the[F207Director General of the Independent Office for Police Conduct].
198	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 7 – Regulations about complaints and conduct mattersDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)(3) This paragraph does not prevent regulations from making provision about the receipt or initial handling of serious complaints or conduct matters otherwise than by the [F207Director General of the Independent Office for Police Conduct] or a police force.(4) This paragraph does not prevent regulations from making provision about—(a) circumstances in which serious complaints or conduct matters are not to be investigated; and(b) circumstances in which investigations of serious complaints or conduct matters are to be discontinued;including provision about the determination of such matters (whether by the [F207Director General of the Independent Office for Police Conduct], a police force or otherwise).(5) Regulations may make provision about what is to be taken to be a criminal offence for the purposes of sub-paragraph (6).(6) In this paragraph “serious complaint” means a qualifying complaint made about conduct which constitutes or involves, or appears to constitute or involve, the commission of a criminal offence.Resolution of other complaints3 (1) This paragraph applies in relation to qualifying complaints which—(a) relate to a holder of the office of—(i) police and crime commissioner,(ii) deputy police and crime commissioner, or(iii) Deputy Mayor for Policing and Crime (unless the holder of that office is a member of the London Assembly), and(b) are not, or cease to be, investigated by the [F207Director General of the Independent Office for Police Conduct] or a police force.(2) Regulations—(a) may not provide for the investigation of such complaints; but(b) must provide for police and crime panels to engage in informal resolution of such complaints.(3) This paragraph does not prevent regulations from making provision about the receipt or initial handling of qualifying complaints otherwise than by police and crime panels.(4) This paragraph does not prevent regulations from making provision about—(a) circumstances in which police and crime panels are not required to engage in informal resolution of such complaints; and(b) circumstances in which informal resolution of such complaints is to be discontinued;including provision about the determination of such matters (whether by police and crime panels or otherwise).
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13) SCHEDULE 7 – Regulations about complaints and conduct matters Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)
199
(5) In this Schedule—(a) references to engaging in informal resolution of a complaint are references to encouraging, facilitating, or otherwise assisting in, the resolution of the complaint otherwise than by legal proceedings; and(b) references to informal resolution of a complaint are to be construed accordingly.4 (1) This paragraph applies in relation to qualifying complaints which—(a) relate to a holder of the office of—(i) the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime, or(ii) Deputy Mayor for Policing and Crime, if the holder of that office is a member of the London Assembly, and(b) are not, or cease to be, investigated by the [F207Director General of the Independent Office for Police Conduct] or a police force.(2) Regulations must secure that such complaints are dealt with in accordance with Part 3 of the Local Government Act 2000.Conferral of functions5 (1) Regulations may confer functions on—(a) the [F207Director General of the Independent Office for Police Conduct],(b) a police force,(c) police and crime panels,(d) the Secretary of State, or(e) any other person.(2) That includes functions involving the exercise of a discretion.
200	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 8 – Appointment, suspension and removal of senior police officersDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)No power to terminate holding of office or employment6 (1) Regulations may not provide for a relevant office holder—(a) to cease to hold office, or(b) to be required to cease to hold office.(2) But that does not apply to regulations under, or for the purposes of, paragraph 4.Application and amendment of other enactments7 (1) Regulations may apply (with or without modifications), or amend or otherwise modify, Part 2 of the Police Reform Act 2002.(2) Regulations may apply (with or without modifications) such other enactments, or make such amendments or other modifications of other enactments, as appear to the Secretary of State to be necessary or expedient—(a) in connection with, or in consequence of, regulations, or(b) for the purposes of paragraph 4.SCHEDULE 8	Section 38APPOINTMENT, SUSPENSION AND REMOVAL OF SENIOR POLICE OFFICERSPART 1APPOINTMENT OF CHIEF CONSTABLESIntroduction1 [F208(1)] A police and crime commissioner must comply with this Part of this Schedule in appointing a chief constable under section 38.1 
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 8 – Appointment, suspension and removal of senior police officers Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)
201
[F209(2) The police and crime commissioner also has duties under section 88C of the Police Act 1996 (effect of inclusion in police barred list) in relation to the appointment of a chief constable.]No appointment until end of confirmation process2 (1) A police and crime commissioner must not appoint a person to be chief constable unless—(a) that person [F210is eligible for appointment] , and(b) the end of the confirmation process has been reached.[F211(1A) [F212Subject to sub-paragraph (1AA), a person] is eligible for appointment if the person is or has been—(a) a constable in any part of the United Kingdom, or(b) a police officer in an approved overseas police force, of at least the approved rank.       [ Where, under an order under section 4H of the Fire and Rescue Services Act 2004 F213(1AA) [F214or section 107EA(2) of the Local Democracy, Economic Development and Construction Act 2009], functions of a fire and rescue authority are delegated tothe chief constable of the police force for a police area, a person is eligible for appointment as that chief constable if the person—(a) has experience at a senior level in the provision of services provided under the Fire and Rescue Services Act 2004, and(b) has undertaken training in relation to policing matters of a kind that is specified by the College of Policing for the purposes of this paragraph.](1B) An “approved overseas police force” is a police force which—(a) is in a country or territory outside the United Kingdom designated by regulations made by the Secretary of State, and(b) is designated in relation to that country or territory by the regulations.(1C) The “approved rank” for an approved overseas police force is the rank which is designated as the approved rank for that police force by the regulations.(1D) The College of Policing must recommend to the Secretary of State matters to be designated under this paragraph.
202	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 8 – Appointment, suspension and removal of senior police officersDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)(1E) The Secretary of State may make regulations under this paragraph only if they give effect to a recommendation under sub-paragraph (1D).](2) The end of the confirmation process is reached—(a) in a case where paragraph 7 applies, when the first of the events mentioned in sub-paragraphs (3) and (4) occurs; or(b) in a case where paragraph 8 applies, when the first of the events mentioned in sub-paragraphs (3) and (5) occurs.(3) The first event mentioned in sub-paragraphs (2)(a) and (2)(b) is the period of three weeks mentioned in paragraph 4(6) ending without the relevant police and crime panel having given the police and crime commissioner any report on the proposed appointment.(4) The second event mentioned in sub-paragraph (2)(a) is the police and crime commissioner notifying the panel under paragraph 7(3) of the decision whether or not to accept the panel's recommendation in relation to the appointment.(5) The second event mentioned in sub-paragraph (2)(b) is the end of the confirmation process being reached in accordance with regulations under paragraph 10.Notification of proposed appointment3 (1) A police and crime commissioner must notify the relevant police and crime panel of each proposed appointment of a chief constable by the commissioner.(2) In such a case, the police and crime commissioner must also notify the relevant police and crime panel of the following information—(a) the name of the person whom the commissioner is proposing to appoint (“the candidate”);(b) the criteria used to assess the suitability of the candidate for the appointment;(c) why the candidate satisfies those criteria; and(d) the terms and conditions on which the candidate is to be appointed.(a) 
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 8 – Appointment, suspension and removal of senior police officers Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)
203
Panel to review and report on proposed appointment4 (1) This paragraph applies if a police and crime panel is notified under paragraph 3 of a proposed appointment of a chief constable.(2) The panel must review the proposed appointment.(3) The panel must make a report to the commissioner on the proposed appointment.(4) The report must include a recommendation to the police and crime commissioner as to whether or not the candidate should be appointed.(5) Sub-paragraph (4) does not apply if the panel vetoes the proposed appointment under paragraph 5 (but see paragraph 5(2)).(6) The panel must comply with sub-paragraphs (2) to (4) within the period of three weeks beginning with the day on which the panel receives the notification from the commissioner of the proposed appointment.(7) The panel must publish the report to the commissioner made under this paragraph.(8) It is for the panel to determine the manner in which the recommendation is to be published in accordance with sub-paragraph (7).(9) In calculating the period of three weeks for the purpose of sub-paragraph (6), any relevant post-election period is to be ignored.(10) For that purpose, “relevant post-election period” means the period that—(a) begins with the day of the poll at an ordinary election of a police and crime commissioner under section 50, and(b) ends with the day on which the person elected as police and crime commissioner delivers a declaration of acceptance of office under section 70.Power to veto proposed appointment5 (1) The police and crime panel may, having reviewed the proposed appointment, veto the appointment of the candidate.(2) If the panel vetoes the appointment of the candidate, the report made under paragraph 4 must include a statement that the panel has vetoed it.(2) 
204	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 8 – Appointment, suspension and removal of senior police officersDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)(3) References in this Schedule to a police and crime panel vetoing the appointment of a candidate are references to the panel making a decision, by the required majority, that the candidate should not be appointed as chief constable.(4) For that purpose, the panel makes that decision by the required majority if at least two-thirds of the persons who are members of the panel at the time when the decision is made vote in favour of making that decision.(5) The power conferred by this paragraph is exercisable in relation to a proposed appointment only during the period of three weeks mentioned in paragraph 4(6).Confirmation hearings6 (1) A police and crime panel must hold a confirmation hearing—(a) before making a report under paragraph 4 to the police and crime commissioner in relation to a proposed appointment of a chief constable, and(b) before making a recommendation under paragraph 4 (where applicable) or vetoing an appointment under paragraph 5 (where applicable).(2) For the purposes of this Part a “confirmation hearing” is a meeting of the panel, held in public, at which the candidate is requested to appear for the purpose of answering questions relating to the appointment.(3) References in this Part to a person appearing at a meeting of the panel are references to the person—(a) attending the meeting in person, or(b) not attending the meeting in person, but participating in the proceedings at the meeting by any means that enable the person to hear, and be heard in, those proceedings as they happen.Next steps if no veto7 (1) This paragraph applies if the police and crime panel does not veto the appointment of a candidate.(2) The police and crime commissioner may accept or reject the panel's recommendation as to whether or not the candidate should be appointed.(3) The police and crime commissioner must notify the panel of the decision whether to accept or reject the recommendation.(2) 
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 8 – Appointment, suspension and removal of senior police officers Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)
205
Next steps if veto8 (1) This paragraph applies if the police and crime panel vetoes the appointment of a candidate.(2) The police and crime commissioner must not appoint that candidate as chief constable.(3) Sub-paragraph (2) is subject to regulations under paragraph 10.Regulations9 (1) The Secretary of State may make regulations about—(a) the steps that are required to be taken by paragraphs 3 to 8, and(b) procedures that are to be followed in taking such steps.(2) The regulations may, in particular, make provision about the time limits applicable in taking steps or following procedures (if, or to the extent that, this Part of this Schedule does not make such provision).10 (1) The Secretary of State may make regulations about the appointment of chief constables in cases where paragraph 8 applies in relation to the appointment of a candidate (the “rejected candidate”).(2) The regulations may make provision about—(a) steps to be taken, and(b) procedures to be followed.(3) That includes provision about the time limits applicable in taking steps or following procedures.(4) The regulations may make provision about limits on who may be considered for appointment.(5) That includes provision about limiting consideration for appointment to some or all of the persons already considered as part of the process by which the rejected candidate was selected for appointment.(6) The regulations may confer functions on—(a) police and crime commissioners,(a) 
206	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 8 – Appointment, suspension and removal of senior police officersDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)(b) police and crime panels,(c) the Secretary of State, or(d) any other person.(7) That includes functions involving the exercise of a discretion.(8) Sub-paragraphs (2) to (7) do not limit the power conferred by sub-paragraph (1).PART 2SUSPENSION AND REMOVAL OF CHIEF CONSTABLESSuspension11 If a police and crime commissioner suspends a chief constable from duty under section 38, the commissioner must notify the relevant police and crime panel of the suspension.Removal: general12 (1) A police and crime commissioner must not call upon a chief constable to retire or resign until the end of the scrutiny process has been reached.(2) The end of the scrutiny process is reached when the first of the following events occurs—(a) the period of six weeks mentioned in paragraph 15(3) has ended without the panel having given the police and crime commissioner any recommendation as to whether or not the commissioner should call for the retirement or resignation;(b) the police and crime commissioner notifies the panel under paragraph 16(2) of the decision whether or not to accept the panel's recommendation in relation to the resignation or retirement.Removal: notification and representations13 (1) A police and crime commissioner must comply with this paragraph before calling upon a chief constable to retire or resign under section 38.1 
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 8 – Appointment, suspension and removal of senior police officers Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)
207
(2) The police and crime commissioner must give the chief constable a written explanation of the reasons why the commissioner is proposing to call for the retirement or resignation.(3) The police and crime commissioner must give the relevant police and crime panel—(a) written notification that the commissioner is proposing to call upon the chief constable to retire or resign; and(b) a copy of the reasons given to the chief constable in accordance with sub- paragraph (1).(4) The police and crime commissioner must give the chief constable the opportunity to make written representations about the proposal to call for the chief constable's resignation or retirement.(5) The police and crime commissioner must—(a) consider any written representations made by the chief constable; and(b) give the relevant police and crime panel a copy of any such representations made by the chief constable, as soon as practicable after the commissioner is given them.Removal: further notification14 (1) A police and crime commissioner must comply with this paragraph if, after complying with paragraph 13, the police and crime commissioner is still proposing to call upon the chief constable to retire or resign under section 38.(2) The police and crime commissioner must notify—(a) the chief constable, and(b) the relevant police and crime panel,that the commissioner is still proposing to call upon the chief constable to retire or resign.Removal: role of panel15 (1) This paragraph applies if a police and crime panel is given a notification under paragraph 14.(2) The panel must make a recommendation to the police and crime commissioner as to whether or not the commissioner should call for the retirement or resignation.(3) The recommendation must be given to the police and crime commissioner in writing before the end of the period of six weeks beginning with the day on which the panel receives the notification under paragraph 14.(2) 
208	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 8 – Appointment, suspension and removal of senior police officersDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)(4) Before making the recommendation, the panel—(a) may consult the chief inspector of constabulary, and(b) must hold a scrutiny hearing.(5) The panel must publish the recommendation made under this paragraph.(6) It is for the panel to determine the manner in which the recommendation is to be published in accordance with sub-paragraph (5).(7) In calculating the period of six weeks mentioned in sub-paragraph (3), any relevant post-election period is to be ignored.(8) For that purpose, “relevant post-election period” means the period that—(a) begins with the day of the poll at an ordinary election of a police and crime commissioner under section 50, and(b) ends with the day on which the person elected as police and crime commissioner delivers a declaration of acceptance of office under section 70.(9) For the purposes of this Part a “scrutiny hearing” is a meeting of the panel, held in private, which the police and crime commissioner and the chief constable are both entitled to attend for the purpose of making representations relating to the proposal to call upon the chief constable to retire or resign.(10) References in this Part to a person appearing at a meeting of the panel are references to the person—(a) attending the meeting in person, or(b) not attending the meeting in person, but participating in the proceedings at the meeting by any means that enable the person to hear, and be heard in, those proceedings as they happen.Removal: consideration of panel's recommendation16 (1) The police and crime commissioner—(a) must consider the panel's recommendation given under paragraph 15, and(b) having considered the recommendation, may accept or reject it.(2) The police and crime commissioner must notify the panel of the decision whether or not to accept the recommendation.
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 8 – Appointment, suspension and removal of senior police officers Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)PART 3SUSPENSION AND REMOVAL OF OTHER SENIOR POLICE OFFICERSSenior police officers17 In this Part of this Schedule “senior police officer” means—(a) a deputy chief constable, or(b) an assistant chief constable.
209
Suspension18 If a chief constable suspends a senior police officer from duty under section 39 or 40, the chief constable must notify the relevant police and crime commissioner of the suspension.Removal19 (1) A chief constable must comply with this paragraph before calling upon a senior police officer to retire or resign under section 39 or 40.(2) The chief constable must give the senior police officer a written explanation of the reasons why the chief constable is proposing to call for the retirement or resignation.(3) The chief constable must give the senior police officer the opportunity to make written representations about the proposal to call for the senior police officer's retirement or resignation.(4) The chief constable must consider any written representations made by the senior police officer.20 (1) This paragraph applies if, after complying with paragraph 19, the chief constable is still proposing to call upon the senior police officer to retire or resign under section 39 or 40.(2) Before calling for the retirement or resignation, the chief constable must consult the relevant police and crime commissioner.
210	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 9 – Supplementary vote systemDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)F215SCHEDULE 9	Section 57. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .SCHEDULE 10	Section 74ELECTIONS OF POLICE AND CRIME COMMISSIONERS: CONSEQUENTIAL AMENDMENTSLocal Government Act 19721 The Local Government Act 1972 is amended as follows.2 In section 67 (consequential and transitional arrangements relating to Part 4), after subsection (5) insert—“(5A) Without prejudice to subsection (5), an order under section 58 which makes provision altering any police areas may make provision as to who is to be a police and crime commissioner, including—(a) provision for the police and crime commissioner for a police area affected by the order to become the police and crime commissioner for a police area resulting from the order;(b) provision for the holding of an election for the police and crime commissioner for any police area resulting from the order.(5B) Such an order which includes provision within subsection (5A)(b) may, in particular, require the election in question to be held before the alteration of police areas takes effect.”
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 10 – Elections of police and crime commissioners: consequential amendments Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)
211
Representation of the People Act 19833 In section 13B(4) of the Representation of the People Act 1983 (alteration of registers: pending elections), omit “and” at the end of paragraph (d) and after paragraph (f) insert “and(g)  elections of police and crime commissioners in England and Wales.”Police Act 19964 The Police Act 1996 is amended as follows.5 (1) Section 32 (power to alter police areas by order) is amended as follows.(2) In subsection (3)(a), for “police authority” substitute “ local policing body ”.(3) In subsection (4), after “ensure that” insert “ no police area falls partly in England and partly in Wales and that ”.6 In section 33(1)(a) (objection to alterations proposed by Secretary of State) for “police authority” substitute “ local policing body ”.7 (1) Section 34 (orders altering police areas: supplementary provisions) is amended as follows.(2) For subsection (1)(a), substitute—“(a)	provision as to who is to be a police and crime commissioner;”.(3) After subsection (1) insert—“(1A) Provision falling within subsection (1)(a) includes, in particular—
212	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 10 – Elections of police and crime commissioners: consequential amendmentsDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)(a) provision for the police and crime commissioner for a police area affected by the order to become the police and crime commissioner for a police area resulting from the order;(b) provision for the holding of an election for the police and crime commissioner for any police area resulting from the order.”(4) In subsection (2)—(a) omit “and” at the end of paragraph (a), and(b) after paragraph (b) insert “and(c) to apply (with or without modification) any provision of, or made under, Chapter 6 of Part 1 of the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011.”(5) After subsection (2) insert—“(2A) An order under section 32 which includes provision within subsection (1A)(b) may, in particular require the election in question to be held before the alteration of police areas takes effect.”Political Parties, Elections and Referendums Act 20008 The Political Parties, Elections and Referendums Act 2000 is amended as follows.9 In section 5 (reports on elections and referendums)—(a) in subsection (2), after paragraph (e) insert—“(f)	an ordinary election of police and crime commissioners.”;(b) in subsection (2A), omit “or” after paragraph (b), and after paragraph (c) insert “or(d) an election held under section 51 of the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (election to fill vacancy in office of police and crime commissioner),”.10 In section 6A (attendance of representatives of Commission at elections), in subsection (5), after paragraph (d) insert—“(da) an election under section 51 of the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (election to fill vacancy in office of police and crime commissioner);”.
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 10 – Elections of police and crime commissioners: consequential amendments Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)
213
11 In section 7 (Commission to be consulted on changes to electoral law), in subsection (2), after paragraph (h) insert—“(ha) an order under subsection (1)(b) of section 54 of the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (designations of returning officers for elections of persons as police and crime commissioners in England and Wales);(hb) regulations under subsection (2) of that section (functions of returning officers and local returning officers for such elections);(hc)  an order under section 58 of that Act (conduct of elections of persons as police and crime commissioners in England and Wales);”.13 In section 9A (setting of performance standards), in subsection (6), after paragraph (d) insert—“(da) an election under section 51 of the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (election to fill vacancy in office of police and crime commissioner);”.Local Government and Public Involvement in Health Act 200714 (1) Section 15 of the Local Government and Public Involvement in Health Act 2007 (structural and boundary change in England: incidental etc provision in orders or regulations) is amended as follows.(2) In subsection (1)—(a) in paragraph (a), for “police authority” in both places where it occurs substitute “ local policing body ”;(a) 
214	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 11 – Crime and disorder strategiesDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)(b) after paragraph (f) insert—“(fa)	as to who is to be a police and crime commissioner;”.(3) After subsection (1) insert—“(1A) Provision falling within subsection (1)(fa) includes, in particular—(a) provision for the police and crime commissioner for a police area affected by an order by virtue of provision made under section 11(4)(g) to become the police and crime commissioner for a police area resulting from the order;(b) provision for the holding of an election for the police and crime commissioner for any police area resulting from the order.”(4) After subsection (3) insert—“(3A) Without prejudice to subsection (2), an order under section 7 or 10 which includes provision within subsection (1A)(b) may, in particular, require the election in question to be held before the alteration of police areas takes effect.”SCHEDULE 11	Section 88CRIME AND DISORDER STRATEGIES1 The Crime and Disorder Act 1998 is amended as follows.2 (1) Section 5 (authorities responsible for strategies) is amended as follows.(2) Omit subsection (1)(c).(3) For subsections (1A) and (1B) substitute—“(1A) The relevant local policing body in relation to two or more local government areas in England may make a combination agreement with the responsible authorities in relation to those areas (the “combined area”).(1B) A combination agreement is an agreement for the functions conferred by or under section 6 or by section 7 to be carried out in relation to the combined area as if it constituted only one local government area.(1BA) The responsible authorities in relation to a combined area are all the persons who are the responsible authorities in relation to each local government area that falls within the combined area.
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13) SCHEDULE 11 – Crime and disorder strategies Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)
215
(1BB) Section 5A contains further provision about the making and contents of combination agreements.”.(4) In subsection (1C) for “An order under subsection (1A) above” substitute “ A combination agreement ”.(5) In subsection (1D), in the definition of “crime and disorder scrutiny functions”, for “an order under subsection (1A) above” substitute “ a combination agreement ”.(6) After subsection (1D) insert—“(1E) The “relevant local policing body”, in relation to a combined area, is—(a) if the area falls (wholly or partly) within the police area of a police and crime commissioner, the commissioner,(b) if the area falls (wholly or partly) within the metropolitan police district, the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime, and(c) if the area falls partly within the City of London, the Secretary of State.(1F) If there is more than one relevant local policing body in relation to a combined area by virtue of subsection (1E), the references in subsection (1A) above and section 5A(2) to the relevant local policing body in relation to the combined area are references to each of the relevant local policing bodies for that area acting jointly.”.(7) In subsection (2) for “those functions” substitute “ the functions conferred by or under section 6 ”.(8) In subsection (5), omit—(a) the word “and” at the end of the definition of “fire and rescue authority”, and(b) the definition of “police authority”.3 After section 5 insert—“5A Combination agreements: further provision(1) A combination agreement for a combined area may be made only if every responsible authority in relation to that area is a party to the agreement.(2) The relevant local policing body for a combined area may enter into a combination agreement for that area only if it considers that it would be in the interests of one or more of the following to do so—(a) reducing crime and disorder;(b) reducing re-offending;(c) combating the misuse of drugs, alcohol and other substances.(3) Subsections (4) to (6) apply if a combined area in relation to a combination agreement includes (wholly or party) the area of more than one police area.(1) 
216	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 11 – Crime and disorder strategiesDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)(4) The combination agreement must include arrangements for securing effective and efficient co-operation—(a) between each of the relevant local policing bodies in relation to the combined area, and(b) between the responsible authorities for the area and those relevant local policing bodies.(5) The Secretary of State must be a party to the agreement (if not already a party by virtue of being a relevant local policing body in relation to the combined area).(6) The Secretary of State may enter into the agreement only if the Secretary of State—(a) considers that it would be in the interests of one or more of the matters mentioned in subsection (2), and(b) is satisfied that the arrangements mentioned in subsection (4) are adequate for the purposes of securing effective and efficient co- operation in the carrying out of functions under section 6.(7) A combination agreement—(a) must be in writing, and(b) may be varied by a further combination agreement.(8) A combination agreement may be terminated by agreement in writing between the parties to it; and subsection (2), and (as the case may be) (6)(a), applies to an agreement under this subsection.(9) In this section “combination agreement”, “combined area” and “relevant local policing body” have the same meanings as in section 5.”.4 (1) Section 6 (formulation and implementation of strategies) is amended as follows.(2) In subsection (1), after “section 5” insert “ , with subsection (1A), ”.(3) After subsection (1) insert—“(1A) In exercising functions under subsection (1), apart from devolved Welsh functions (as defined by section 5(8)), each of the responsible authorities for a local government area must have regard to the police and crime objectives set out in the police and crime plan for the police area which comprises or includes that local government area.”.(4) In subsection (3) after paragraph (c) insert—“(ca) the conferring of functions on a police and crime commissioner for a police area in England in relation to the formulation and implementation of a strategy for any local government area that lies in that police area;”.(5) After subsection (4) insert—(2) 
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13) SCHEDULE 11 – Crime and disorder strategies Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)
217
“(4A) Provision under subsection (3)(ca) may include provision—(a) for a police and crime commissioner to arrange for meetings to be held for the purpose of assisting in the formulation and implementation of any strategy (or strategies) that the commissioner may specify that relate to any part of the police area of the commissioner,(b) for the commissioner to chair the meetings, and(c) for such descriptions and numbers of persons to attend the meetings as the commissioner may specify (including, in particular, representatives of the responsible authorities in relation to the strategies to be discussed at the meetings).”.5 (1) Section 7 (supplemental) is amended as follows.(2) In subsection (1)—(a) for “Secretary of State” (in the first place) substitute “ relevant local policing body for that area ”,(b) for “the Secretary of State” (in the second place) substitute “ that body ”, and(c) after “section 6 above” insert “ , apart from devolved Welsh functions (as defined by section 5(8)), ”.(3) After subsection (1) insert—“(1A) The relevant local policing body in relation to a local government area may require a report under subsection (1) only if—(a) the body is not satisfied that the responsible authorities for the area are carrying out their functions under section 6 in an effective and efficient manner, and(b) the body considers it reasonable and proportionate in all the circumstances to require a report.”(4) In subsection (3)—(a) for “Secretary of State” substitute “ relevant local policing body ”, and(b) for “him” substitute “ the body ”.(5) After subsection (3) insert—“(4) Relevant local policing body”, in relation to a local government area, means—(a) if the area (or any part of it) falls within the police area of a police and crime commissioner, the commissioner,(b) if the area (or any part of it) falls within the metropolitan police district, the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime, and(c) if the area (or any part of it) is the City of London, the Secretary of State.(a) 
218	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 12 – Collaboration agreementsDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)(5) If there is more than one relevant local policing body in relation to a combined area that is to be treated as one local government area under a combination agreement (see section 5(1A))—(a) a report submitted under subsection (1) is to be submitted to each of the relevant local policing bodies for the combined area, and(b) references in this section to any requirement or arrangement made by the relevant local policing body are references to a requirement or arrangement made by each of the relevant local policing bodies for the combined area acting jointly.”.SCHEDULE 12	Section 89COLLABORATION AGREEMENTS1 The Police Act 1996 is amended as follows.2 (1) Section 23 (police force collaboration agreements) is amended in accordance with this paragraph.(2) In the title, for “Police force collaboration agreements” substitute “ Collaboration agreements involving police forces ”.(3) Omit subsection (1).(4) In subsection (2), for the words before paragraph (a) substitute—“(2) Force collaboration provision may, in particular, consist of provision—”.(5) Omit subsection (3).(6) In subsection (4), for “An agreement” substitute “ A collaboration agreement ”.(7) In subsection (5), for “an agreement” substitute “ a collaboration agreement ”.(8) Omit subsections (6), (7) and (8).3 (1) Section 23A (police authority collaboration agreements) is amended in accordance with this paragraph.(2) For the title substitute “ Collaboration agreements involving policing bodies ”.(2) 
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13) SCHEDULE 12 – Collaboration agreementsDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)
219
(3) Omit subsection (1).(4) In subsection (2)—(a) for the words before paragraph (a) substitute—“(2) Policing body collaboration provision, or policing body & force collaboration provision, may, in particular, consist of provision—”;(b) in paragraphs (a) and (b), for “authorities” substitute “ policing bodies ”;(c) in paragraph (c)—(i) for “an authority” substitute “ a policing body ”;(ii) for “another authority” (in each place) substitute “ another policing body ”.(5) In subsection (3), for “In this section” substitute “ In relation to policing body collaboration provision, or policing body & force collaboration provision, ”.(6) Omit subsection (4).(7) In subsection (5)—(a) for “A police authority may make an agreement” substitute “ A policing body may make a collaboration agreement ”;(b) for “police authorities” substitute “ policing bodies ”.(8) For subsection (6), substitute—“(6) A policing body must consult the chief officer of police of the police force which the body is responsible for maintaining before making a collaboration agreement (unless that chief officer is a party to the agreement).”.(9) Omit subsection (7).4 (1) Section 23B (collaboration agreements: payments) is amended in accordance with this paragraph.(2) In subsection (1), for “relevant police authorities” substitute “ parties to the agreement ”.(3) In subsection (2)—(a) after “may” insert “ in the case of policing bodies or chief officers of police who are parties to the agreement ”;(b) in paragraph (a), for “authorities” (in each place) substitute “ policing bodies or chief officers of police ”.(4) In subsection (3), for “A relevant police authority” substitute “ A policing body or chief officer of police ”.(5) Omit subsections (4) and (5).(2) 
220	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 12 – Collaboration agreementsDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)5 (1) Section 23C (collaboration agreements: consultation and supplemental) is amended in accordance with this paragraph.(2) Omit subsection (1).(3) After subsection (5) insert—“(6) If circumstances are such that one or more of the parties to a collaboration agreement would not, at a particular time, have power to enter into a collaboration agreement of that description (whether because of a failure to meet the requirements of section 22A(1) or (5) or otherwise) each person who does not have that power must cease to be a party to the agreement.”.6 (1) Section 23D (collaboration agreements: accountability) is amended as follows.(2) In subsection (1)—(a) for “police force collaboration agreement” substitute “ collaboration agreement ”;(b) for “police authority” substitute “ policing body ”.(3) In subsection (2), for “approving an agreement as mentioned in section 23(6), a police authority” substitute “ making a collaboration agreement to which a chief officer of police is to be a party, a policing body ”.(4) In subsection (3)—(a) for “police authority” (in each place) substitute “ policing body ”;(b) for “consider making” substitute “ make ”.(5) In subsection (4), for “police authority” substitute “ policing body ”.7 In section 23E (collaboration agreements: publication), in subsection (2), for the words before “must” substitute “ In a case where information is notified to a chief officer of police under section 23D(2), that information ”.8 In section 23F (collaboration agreements: guidance), for “police authorities” (in each place) substitute “ policing bodies ”.1 
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13) SCHEDULE 12 – Collaboration agreementsDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)
221
9 In section 23G (collaboration agreements: directions), in subsections (1) and (2), for “police authorities” substitute “ policing bodies ”.10 After section 23H insert—“23HA Decisions about efficiency or effectivenessIn reaching a conclusion about whether or not a collaboration agreement is, or would be, in the interests of efficiency or effectiveness of one or more police forces (the “police forces under consideration”), a person must, in particular, consider—(a) the existing collaboration agreements, and other arrangements for co-operation, to which the police forces under consideration are parties;(b) the desirability of police forces taking a consistent approach in making such agreements and other arrangements; and(c) the opportunities available to the police forces under consideration to make such agreements and other arrangements.”.11 (1) Section 23I (collaboration agreements: definitions) is amended in accordance with this paragraph.(2) In subsection (1), for “23” substitute “ 22A ”.(3) In subsection (4), for the words before paragraph (a) insert— “(4) Policing body” means—(aa)	a local policing body,”.(4) After subsection (4) insert—“(5) The following expressions have the meanings given in section 22A— “collaboration agreement”;“force collaboration provision”; “policing body collaboration provision”;“policing body & force collaboration provision”.(6) References to the police force which a policing body is responsible for maintaining include—(5) 
222	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 13 – Police powers for civilian employees under collaboration agreementsDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)(a) in the case of the British Transport Police Authority, the British Transport Police, and(b) in the case of the Civil Nuclear Police Authority, the Civil Nuclear Constabulary.(7) References to a police force include—(a) references to the special constables appointed by a chief officer of police, and(b) references to the civilian employees of the police force;and references to the members of a police force are to be read accordingly.(8) For that purpose “civilian employee” means—(a) in the case of a police force maintained under section 2 or 5A, the members of the civilian staff of that force;(b) in the case of any other police force, the employees of the policing body responsible for maintaining that force who are under the direction and control of the chief officer of police of that force.”.SCHEDULE 13	Section 90POLICE POWERS FOR CIVILIAN EMPLOYEES UNDER COLLABORATION AGREEMENTSPolice Act 19961 After section 23A of the Police Act 1996 insert—“23AA Force collaboration provision about civilian employees(1) This section applies to force collaboration provision, contained in a collaboration agreement, which is about the discharge of functions by designated civilian employees of one police force (the “assisting force”) for the purposes of another police force (the “assisted force”).(2) The force collaboration provision must specify—(a) the functions which the designated civilian employees are permitted by the collaboration agreement to discharge for the purposes of the assisted force, and(b) any restrictions or conditions on that permission for the designated civilian employees to discharge those functions.(3) The force collaboration provision must not permit the designated civilian employees to discharge functions for the purposes of the assisted force unless those employees are, by virtue of the relevant section 38 designation, authorised to discharge those functions for the purposes of the assisting force.(1) 
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 13 – Police powers for civilian employees under collaboration agreements Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)
223
(4) The force collaboration provision does not authorise the designated civilian employees to discharge functions for the purposes of the assisted force (but see section 38B of the Police Reform Act 2002).(5) References in this section to the discharge of functions by civilian employees of the assisting force for the purposes of the assisted force include references to—(a) the joint discharge of functions by the civilian employees and members of the assisted police force,(b) the discharge of functions by the civilian employees in the assisted force's area, and(c) the provision of the civilian employees to the assisted force.(6) In this section—  “designated”, in relation to a civilian employee of a police force, means designated by the chief officer of police of that force by a section 38 designation;  “relevant section 38 designation”, in relation to a designated civilian employee, means the section 38 designation relating to the employee;  “section 38 designation” means a designation under section 38 of the Police Reform Act 2002.”.Police Reform Act 20022 The Police Reform Act 2002 is amended as follows.3 After section 38A insert—“38B Police powers for civilian employees under collaboration agreements(1) The chief officer of police of a police force (the “assisted force”) may designate a person (“C”) who—(a) is a civilian employee of another police force (the “assisting force”),(b) is designated under section 38 by the chief officer of police of the assisting police force (the “section 38 designation”), and(c) is permitted, under relevant police collaboration provision, to discharge powers and duties specified in that provision for the purposes of the assisted force.(a) 
224	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 13 – Police powers for civilian employees under collaboration agreementsDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)(2) The designation under subsection (1) (the “collaboration designation”) must designate C as an officer of one or more of the descriptions specified in section 38(2).(3) The collaboration designation may designate C as an officer of a particular description specified in section 38(2) only if the section 38 designation designates C as an officer of that description.(4) C shall have the powers and duties conferred or imposed on C by the collaboration designation.(5) A power or duty may be conferred or imposed on C by the collaboration designation only if C is permitted, under the relevant police collaboration provision, to discharge that power or duty for the purposes of the assisted force.(6) C shall not be authorised or required by virtue of the collaboration designation to engage in any conduct otherwise than in the course of discharging a power or duty conferred or imposed on C by the collaboration designation.(7) The collaboration designation must specify the restrictions and conditions to which C is subject in the discharge of the powers and duties conferred or imposed by the collaboration designation.(8) Those restrictions and conditions must include the restrictions and conditions specified in the relevant police collaboration provision.(9) C is authorised or required to discharge any power or duty conferred or imposed by the collaboration designation subject to the restrictions and conditions specified in the collaboration designation.(10) References in this section to the discharge of functions by civilian employees of the assisting force for the purposes of the assisted force have the same meaning as in section 23B of the Police Act 1996.(11) In this section—  “civilian employee” has the meaning given by section 23I of the Police Act 1996;  “relevant police collaboration provision” means provision, contained in a collaboration agreement under section 22A of the Police Act 1996, which is of the kind referred to in section 23AA of that Act.38C Designations under section 38B: supplementary provision(1) The collaboration designation of C must be in accordance with the relevant police collaboration provision.(2) Subsection (1) is in addition to section 38B(5) and (8).(3) Subsections (8) and (9) of section 38 apply to any power exercisable by C in reliance on the collaboration designation as they apply to a power exercisable by a person in reliance on a designation under section 38.(1) 
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 13 – Police powers for civilian employees under collaboration agreements Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)
225
(4) In exercising or performing any power or duty in reliance on the collaboration designation, C is to be taken—(a) as exercising or performing that power or duty in reliance on that collaboration designation (and not in reliance on any designation under section 38); and(b) accordingly, as not being a designated person (within the meaning of section 46(1)) by virtue of any designation under section 38.(5) Expressions used in this section and section 38B have the same meanings in this section as in section 38B.”.4 (1) Section 42 (supplementary provisions relating to designations and accreditations) is amended in accordance with this paragraph.(2) In subsection (1), after “section 38” insert “ , 38B ”.(3) After subsection (2) insert—“(2ZA) A power exercisable by any person in reliance on a designation under section 38B by the chief officer of police of the assisted force shall, subject to subsection (2A), be exercisable only by a person wearing such uniform as may be—(a) determined or approved for the purposes of this Chapter by the chief officer of police of the assisting police force; and(b) identified or described in the designation.In this subsection, “assisted force” and “assisting force” have the same meanings as in section 38B.”.(4) In subsection (2A), after “subsection (2)” insert “ or (2ZA) ”.(5) In subsection (2B), after “section 38” insert “ (in relation to subsection (2)) or section 38B (in relation to subsection (2ZA)) ”.(6) In subsection (3), after “section 38” insert “ , 38B ”.(7) After subsection (7) insert—“(7A) For the purposes of determining liability for the unlawful conduct of a civilian employee of a police force (within the meaning of section 38B), conduct by such an employee in reliance or purported reliance on a designation under section 38B shall be taken to be conduct in the course of the employee's employment by the employer; and, in the case of a tort, that employer shall fall to be treated as a joint tortfeasor accordingly.”.5 In section 46 (offences against designated and accredited persons etc), after subsection (4) insert—1 
226	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 14 – Police: complaintsDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)“(5) References in this section to a designated person are to—(a) a designated person within the meaning given by section 47(1), and(b) a person in relation to whom a designation under section 38B is for the time being in force.”.Railways and Transport Safety Act 20036 In section 28 of the Railways and Transport Safety Act 2003 (exercise of powers by civilians), after subsection (1)(aa) insert—“(ab)	sections 38B and 38C (police powers for civilian employees under collaboration agreements),”.SCHEDULE 14	Section 95POLICE: COMPLAINTSIntroduction1 The Police Reform Act 2002 is amended in accordance with this Schedule.Membership and proceedings of Independent Police Complaints Commission2 In section 9(2)(b) (minimum number of members of Commission), for “ten” substitute “ five ”.3 In Schedule 2 (the Independent Police Complaints Commission), in paragraph 10 (proceedings), omit sub-paragraph (6).1 
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13) SCHEDULE 14 – Police: complaintsDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)
227
Complaints about policing4 Omit section 14 (direction and control matters).5 (1) In section 29(1) (interpretation of Part 2), in the definition of “conduct” in subsection (1), for “and statements” substitute “ , statements and decisions ”.(2) In Schedule 3 (handling of complaints and conduct matters), in paragraph 4 (reference of complaints to the Commission), after sub-paragraph (7) insert—“(8) In a case where—(a) a complaint relates to a direction and control matter, and(b) there is no obligation under this paragraph for the appropriate authority to refer the complaint to the Commission,the appropriate authority may refer the complaint to the Commission under this paragraph only if the Commission consents.”.6 In consequence of paragraph 4—(a) in section 10 (general functions of the Commission), omit subsection (8);(b) in section 13 (handling of complaints, conduct matters and DSI matters etc), omit “subject to section 14(1)”.
228	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 14 – Police: complaintsDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)Power of local policing body to direct chief officer of police to comply with obligations7 In section 15 (general duties of local policing bodies, chief officers and inspectors), after subsection (2) insert—“(2A) Subsection (2B) applies in a case where it appears to a local policing body that—(a) an obligation to act or refrain from acting has arisen by or under this Part,(b) that obligation is an obligation of the chief officer of police of the police force which is maintained by the local policing body, and(c) the chief officer has not yet complied with that obligation, or has contravened it.(2B) The local policing body may direct the chief officer to take such steps as the local policing body thinks appropriate.(2C) The chief officer must comply with any direction given under subsection (2B).”.Initial handling and recording of complaints8 (1) In Schedule 3 (handling of complaints and conduct matters), paragraph 2 (initial handling and recording of complaints) is amended in accordance with sub- paragraphs (2) to (5).(2) For sub-paragraph (1) substitute—“(1) Where a complaint is made to the Commission, it shall give notification of the complaint to the appropriate authority.(1A) But the Commission need not give that notification if the Commission considers that there are exceptional circumstances that justify its not being given.”.(3) Omit sub-paragraph (4).(4) In sub-paragraph (5)—(a) in the words before sub-paragraph (a)—(i) omit the words from “or the Commission” to “sub-paragraph (4)”;(ii) omit “or, as the case may be, the Commission”;(b) omit sub-paragraph (b) (and the word “or” preceding it).F216(5) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .(6) In consequence of the amendments made by sub-paragraphs (2) to (5)—(a) in section 12(2) (complaints, matters and persons to which Part 2 applies), omit “, paragraph 2(4) of Schedule 3”;(a) 
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13) SCHEDULE 14 – Police: complaintsDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)
229
(b) in section 29(1) (interpretation of Part 2), omit paragraph (b) of the definition of “recordable conduct matter”.Handling of complaints by the appropriate authority9 (1) In Schedule 3 (handling of complaints and conduct matters), for paragraph 6 (handling of complaints by the appropriate authority) substitute—“6	(1) This paragraph applies where a complaint has been recorded by the appropriate authority.(2) But this paragraph does not apply to a complaint if it is one that has been, or must be, referred to the Commission under paragraph 4, unless the complaint is for the time being—(a) referred back to the authority under paragraph 5, or(b) the subject of a determination under paragraph 15.(3) Subject to paragraph 7, the appropriate authority shall determine whether or not the complaint is suitable for being subjected to local resolution.(4) If the appropriate authority determines that the complaint is suitable for being subjected to local resolution, it shall make arrangements for it to be so subjected.(5) If the appropriate authority determines that the complaint is not so suitable, it shall make arrangements for the complaint to be investigated by the authority on its own behalf.(6) A determination that a complaint is suitable for being subjected to local resolution may not be made unless the following conditions are both met.(7) The first condition is that the appropriate authority is satisfied that the conduct complained of (even if it were proved) would not justify the bringing of any criminal or disciplinary proceedings against the person whose conduct is complained of.(8) The second condition is that the appropriate authority is satisfied that the conduct complained of (even if it were proved) would not involve the infringement of a person's rights under Article 2 or 3 of the Convention (within the meaning of the Human Rights Act 1998).(9) In a case where this paragraph applies to a complaint by virtue of sub- paragraph (2)(b), a determination that the complaint is suitable for being(2) 
230	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 14 – Police: complaintsDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)subjected to local resolution may not be made unless the Commission approves the determination.(10) No more than one application may be made to the Commission for the purposes of sub-paragraph (9) in respect of the same complaint.(11) Sub-paragraph (9) (where applicable) is in addition to sub-paragraphs(6) to (8).”.F217(2) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .(3) In section 22 (power of the Commission to issue guidance), in subsection (5)(c), omit sub-paragraph (ii) (and the word “and” at the end of sub-paragraph (i)).”.Disapplication of requirements of Schedule 3 to 2002 ActF218 10	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Conduct matters arising in civil proceedings11 (1) In Schedule 3 (handling of complaints and conduct matters), paragraph 10 (conduct matters arising in civil proceedings) is amended in accordance with sub-paragraphs(2) to (4).(2) In sub-paragraph (3), for “record that matter” substitute “ determine whether the matter is one which it or he is required to refer to the Commission under paragraph 13 or is one which it would be appropriate to so refer ”.(3) For sub-paragraph (4) substitute—“(4) In a case where the appropriate authority determines that the matter is one which it or he is required to refer to the Commission under paragraph 13, or is one which it would be appropriate to so refer, it or he shall record the matter.(4A) In any other case, the appropriate authority shall determine whether the matter falls within a description of matters specified in regulations made by the Secretary of State for the purposes of this sub-paragraph.
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13) SCHEDULE 14 – Police: complaintsDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)
231
(4B) In a case where the appropriate authority determines that the matter does not fall within such a description, it or he shall record the matter.(4C) In any other case, the appropriate authority may (but need not) record the matter.(4D) In a case where the appropriate authority—(a) records a matter under this paragraph, and(b) is not required to refer the matter to the Commission under paragraph 13 and does not do so,the appropriate authority may deal with the matter in such other manner (if any) as it or he may determine.”.(4) In sub-paragraph (5), for “sub-paragraph (3)” substitute “ sub-paragraph (4) or (4B) ”.(5) In paragraph 16(2)(a) of Schedule 3, for “10(4)(b)” substitute “ 10(4D) ”.Recording etc of conduct matters in other cases12 (1) In Schedule 3 (handling of complaints and conduct matters), paragraph 11 (recording etc of conduct matters in other cases) is amended in accordance with sub-paragraphs(2) to (4).(2) In sub-paragraph (1)—(a) for the words before paragraph (a) substitute—“(1) This paragraph applies where—”;(b) omit the words after paragraph (b).(3) For sub-paragraph (3) substitute—“(3) The appropriate authority must determine whether the matter is one which it or he is required to refer to the Commission under paragraph 13, or is one which it would be appropriate to so refer.(3A) In a case where the appropriate authority determines that the matter is one which it or he is required to refer to the Commission under paragraph 13, or is one which it would be appropriate to so refer, it or he shall record the matter.(3B) In any other case, the appropriate authority shall determine whether the matter falls within a description of matters specified in regulations made by the Secretary of State for the purposes of this sub-paragraph.(3C) In a case where the appropriate authority determines that the matter does not fall within such a description, it or he shall record the matter.(3D) In any other case, the appropriate authority may (but need not) record the matter.(3E) In a case where the appropriate authority—
232	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 14 – Police: complaintsDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)(a) records a matter under this paragraph, and(b) is not required to refer the matter to the Commission under paragraph 13 and does not do so,the appropriate authority may deal with the matter in such other manner (if any) as it or he may determine.”.(4) In sub-paragraph (4), for “sub-paragraph (1)” substitute “ sub-paragraph (3A) or (3C) ”.(5) In paragraph 16(2)(a) of Schedule 3, for “11(3)(b)” substitute “ 11(3E) ”.Power to discontinue an investigationF219 13	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Duties with respect to disciplinary proceedings14 (1) Schedule 3 is amended in accordance with this paragraph.F220(2) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .(3) In paragraph 24 (action by the appropriate authority in response to an investigation report under paragraph 22), in sub-paragraph (6)(a), after sub-paragraph (i) insert— “(ia) whether or not any such person's performance isunsatisfactory, and”.F221(4) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .F221(5) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13) SCHEDULE 14 – Police: complaintsDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)
233
Rights of appeal15 Schedule 3 (handling of complaints and conduct matters) is amended in accordance with the following paragraphs of this Schedule.F222 16	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .F223 17	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .F224 18	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .F225 19	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .20 (1) In the italic heading that precedes paragraph 25 (appeals to the Commission with respect to an investigation), omit “to the Commission”.(2) Paragraph 25 is amended in accordance with the following provisions of this paragraph.F226(3) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .F226(4) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .F226(5) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
234	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 14 – Police: complaintsDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)F226(6) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .F226(7) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .F226(8) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .F226(9) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .F226(10) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .F226(11) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .(12) In sub-paragraph (10)—(a) in the words before paragraph (a), for “Commission” substitute “ relevant appeal body ”;(b) in sub-paragraph (a), after “authority” insert “ (unless it is the relevant appeal body) ”;(c) in sub-paragraph (d), for “Commission” substitute “ relevant appeal body ”.F227(13) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .(14) In sub-paragraph (13), for “Commission” substitute “ relevant appeal body ”.21 In paragraph 29 (minor definitions), before the definition of “gross misconduct” insert—““direction and control matter” means a matter that relates to the direction and control of a police force by—(a) the chief officer of police of that force, or(b) a person for the time being carrying out the functions of the chief officer of police of that force;”.22 After paragraph 29 insert—“Appeals: the relevant appeal body30 (1) The relevant appeal body in relation to an appeal is—30 
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13) SCHEDULE 14 – Police: complaintsDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)
235
(a) the Commission, in a case where the relevant complaint falls within a description of complaints specified in regulations made by the Secretary of State for the purposes of this paragraph; or(b) the chief officer of police who is the appropriate authority in relation to the relevant complaint, in any other case.(2) In this paragraph and paragraphs 31 and 32—  “appeal” means an appeal under paragraph 7(8), 8A, 21(7) or 25(2);  “relevant complaint”, in relation to an appeal, means the complaint to which the appeal relates.31 (1) This paragraph applies in a case where—(a) an appeal is made to the Commission, and(b) the appropriate authority is the relevant appeal body in relation to the appeal.(2) The Commission must—(a) forward the appeal to the appropriate authority; and(b) notify the person who made the appeal—(i) that the appropriate authority is the relevant appeal body; and(ii) the appeal has been forwarded.(3) The appeal is to be taken to have been—(a) made to the appropriate authority, and(b) so made at the time when it is forwarded to the appropriate authority.32 (1) This paragraph applies in a case where—(a) an appeal is made to the appropriate authority; and(b) the Commission is the relevant appeal body in relation to the appeal.(2) The appropriate authority must—(a) forward the appeal to the Commission; and(b) notify the person who made the appeal—(i) that the Commission is the relevant appeal body; and(ii) the appeal has been forwarded.(3) The appeal is to be taken to have been—(a) made to the Commission; and(b) so made at the time when it is forwarded to the Commission.”.
236	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 15 – Police reform: transitional provisionDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)SCHEDULE 15	Section 98POLICE REFORM: TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONPART 1CHIEF OFFICERS OF POLICECurrent chief officers to remain in post1 (1) At the relevant commencement time a person who, immediately before that time, is in post as the existing chief officer of the police force for a police area becomes the new chief officer of that police force.(2) Where a person has, prior to the relevant commencement time, accepted an appointment as the existing chief officer of the police force for a police area which is to come into effect at a time (the “effective time”) which falls at or after the relevant commencement time, that appointment is to take effect at the effective time as an appointment as the new chief officer of that police force.(3) Sub-paragraph (2) is without prejudice to any right of the person appointed not to take up the appointment.Transfer of rights and liabilities2 At the relevant commencement time, all rights and liabilities which immediately before that time were rights and liabilities of the existing chief officer of the police force for a police area are to transfer to the new chief officer of that police force.Relevant legislative provisions3 (1) Any relevant legislative provision which, immediately before the relevant commencement time, applied to chief constables of police forces maintained under section 2 of the Police Act 1996 is to apply after that time in the same way to chief constables established under section 2 of this Act (except where the context otherwise requires).(2) Any relevant legislative provision which, immediately before the relevant commencement time, applied to the Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis is to apply after that time in the same way to the Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis established under section 4 of this Act (except where the context otherwise requires).(2) 
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13) SCHEDULE 15 – Police reform: transitional provision Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)
237
(3) Sub-paragraphs (1) and (2) are subject to any provision to the contrary made—(a) by or under this Act, or(b) by any other Act passed, or subordinate legislation made, on or after the passing of this Act.(4) In this paragraph—“relevant legislative provision” means—(a) provision of an Act made before the relevant commencement day, or(b) provision of an instrument made before the relevant commencement day under a public general Act which is of a legislative character;but provision which applies only to specified chief constables of police forces maintained under section 2 of the Police Act 1996 is not relevant legislative provision.Interpretation4 In this Part “relevant commencement time” means—(a) in relation to a police area listed in Schedule 1 to the Police Act 1996, the time when section 2 comes into force in relation to that area;(b) in relation to the metropolitan police district, the time when section 4 comes into force.PART 2INITIAL TRANSFER FROM POLICE AUTHORITIESTransfer of property, rights and liabilities5 (1) At the relevant commencement time, all property, rights and liabilities which immediately before that time were property, rights and liabilities of the existing police authority for a police area are to transfer to, and by virtue of this paragraph vest in, the new policing body for that police area.(2) This paragraph does not apply to any rights or liabilities under a contract of employment (which are dealt with in paragraph 6).(2) 
238	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 15 – Police reform: transitional provisionDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)Transfer of staff6 (1) Subject to sub-paragraphs (5) and (6), this paragraph applies to any person who immediately before the relevant commencement time is a member of the staff of the existing police authority for a police area (the “existing employer”).(2) A contract of employment between a person to whom this paragraph applies and the existing employer is to have effect from the relevant commencement time as if originally made between that person and the new policing body for the police area in relation to which the existing employer was established (the “new employer”).(3) Sub-paragraph (2) does not break the continuity of a person's employment and accordingly such a person's period of employment with the existing employer counts as a period of employment with the new employer for the purposes of the Employment Rights Act 1996.(4) Without prejudice to sub-paragraph (2)—(a) all the existing employer's rights, powers, duties and liabilities under or in connection with a contract to which that sub-paragraph applies are by virtue of this paragraph transferred to the new employer at the relevant commencement time; and(b) anything done before that date by or in relation to the existing employer in respect of that contract or the employee shall be deemed from that date to have been done by or in relation to the new employer.(5) Sub-paragraphs (2) to (4) are without prejudice to any right of a member of staff to terminate the contract of employment if a substantial change is made to the person's detriment in the person's working conditions; but no such right arises by reason only of the change in employer effected by this paragraph.(6) Where a person—(a) has, prior to the relevant commencement time, entered into a contract of employment with an existing police authority which is to come into effect at or after that time; and(b) would, if the contract had come into effect before that date, have been a person to whom this paragraph applies,that person is to be treated as a person to whom this paragraph applies.(7) A person who would (but for this sub-paragraph) be treated as being dismissed by the operation of this paragraph (whether by an enactment or otherwise) is to be treated as not being so dismissed.(8) Sub-paragraph (7) does not apply to a person who, by virtue of sub-paragraph (5), does not become an employee of a new policing body.(9) This paragraph is subject to paragraph 7.(2) 
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13) SCHEDULE 15 – Police reform: transitional provision Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)
239
Police civilians7 (1) The new policing body for a police area—(a) is to have, for the purpose mentioned in sub-paragraph (2), relevant powers to arrange for the new chief officer of the police force for that area to discharge functions of that body; and(b) must exercise those powers for the purpose mentioned in sub-paragraph (2).(2) That purpose is securing that the police civilian members of staff of that new policing body are under the direction and control of that chief officer.(3) Any arrangements made in compliance with section 15(2) of the Police Act 1996 between the existing police authority for a police area and the existing chief officer of the police force for that area which are in force immediately before the relevant commencement time are to have effect at and after that time as if made under this paragraph between the new policing body for that area and the new chief officer of that police force.(4) Sub-paragraph (5) applies to a person who—(a) immediately before the relevant commencement time, is a police civilian member of the staff of an existing police authority, and(b) at that time becomes a member of the staff of the new policing body for a police area by virtue of paragraph 6.(5) For as long as the person continues to be a member of the staff of that body, the person is to be—(a) employed as a police civilian member of that staff, and(b) under the direction and control of the new chief officer of the police for that area.(6) Sub-paragraph (5) does not prevent the new policing body from making arrangements with the person for the person to cease to be a police civilian member of staff of that body (whether or not the person remains a member of the staff of that body).(7) After the relevant commencement time, a new policing body may, for either of the purposes set out in sub-paragraph (8), make arrangements—(a) with any member of the staff of the body who is not a police civilian member of staff to become a police civilian member of that staff, or(b) with a person who is not a member of that body's staff to become a police civilian member of that staff.(8) In relation to the new policing body for a police area those purposes are—(a) replacing police civilian members of staff of the existing police authority for that area who did not become members of the staff of the new policing body in accordance with paragraph 6;(a) 
240	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 15 – Police reform: transitional provisionDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)(b) replacing police civilian members of staff of the new policing body who have ceased to be police civilian members of staff of that body otherwise than by virtue of a transfer scheme under Part 2 of this Schedule; or(c) to supplement the police civilian members of staff of the new policing body.(9) Sub-paragraphs (1) to (5) are subject to—(a) any provision included in a collaboration agreement under section 22A of the Police Act 1996, and(b) section 24(3A) of that Act (aid of one police force by another).(10) In this paragraph—(a) “relevant powers” means powers corresponding to those conferred by sections 101 and 107 of the Local Government Act 1972 on police authorities established under section 3 of the Police Act 1996;(b) references to a police civilian member of staff of an existing police authority or a new policing body are references to a member of the staff of that authority or body who is employed solely to assist the police force maintained by that authority or body;(c) the chief officers' powers of direction and control referred to include powers of engagement and dismissal.Seconded staff8 In the case of a person who, immediately before the relevant commencement time, is seconded to the existing police authority for a police area, the secondment is to have effect, after that time, as a secondment to the new policing body for that police area.Interpretation9 In this Part “relevant commencement time” means—(a) in relation to a police area listed in Schedule 1 to the Police Act 1996, the time when section 1 comes into force in relation to that area;(b) in relation to the metropolitan police district, the time when section 3 comes into force.
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13) SCHEDULE 15 – Police reform: transitional provision Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)
241
PART 3SUBSEQUENT TRANSFER BY NEW POLICING BODYPower to direct new policing body to make transfer scheme10 (1) The Secretary of State may direct a new policing body—(a) to make one or more transfer schemes, and(b) to submit such a scheme to the Secretary of State for approval.(2) If the Secretary of State gives a direction under sub-paragraph (1)(b), the Secretary of State may—(a) approve the scheme as submitted,(b) approve the scheme with modifications, or(c) reject the scheme.(3) Before making a decision under sub-paragraph (2), the Secretary of State must—(a) consult the new policing body, and(b) if the scheme includes provision about the transfer of staff, consult persons who, in the Secretary of State's opinion, represent the views of the staff concerned.(4) If the Secretary of State gives a direction under sub-paragraph (1)(b), the new policing body—(a) must not make the scheme unless the Secretary of State approves it, and(b) if the Secretary of State approves the scheme with modifications, must make it with those modifications.(5) A direction under this paragraph—(a) must be in writing; and(b) may be varied or revoked by a further direction.11 (1) The Secretary of State may make one or more transfer schemes in relation to a new policing body if—(a) the body does not comply with a direction given to it under paragraph 10, or(b) the Secretary of State decides not to approve one or more schemes submitted by that body under paragraph 10.(2) A scheme made by the Secretary of State under this paragraph is to be treated as if made by the new policing body.
242	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 15 – Police reform: transitional provisionDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)12 (1) The Secretary of State may direct a new policing body—(a) to modify a transfer scheme made by that body, and(b) to submit such a scheme to the Secretary of State for approval.(2) Sub-paragraphs (2) to (5) of paragraph 10 apply to a direction under sub- paragraph (1) of this paragraph as they apply to a direction under sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 10.(3) In the application of paragraph 10(2) to (5) by virtue of sub-paragraph (2)—(a) references to paragraph 10(1)(b) have effect as references to sub- paragraph (1)(b) of this paragraph;(b) references to the making of a scheme have effect as references to the modification of a scheme;(c) references to a scheme have effect as references to a scheme as modified.(4) The Secretary of State may modify a transfer scheme made by a new policing body if—(a) the authority does not comply with a direction given to it under sub- paragraph (1), or(b) the Secretary of State decides not to approve the modified scheme submitted by the body.(5) A scheme modified by the Secretary of State under sub-paragraph (4) is to be treated as if modified (and made) by the new policing body.(6) A scheme modified in accordance with this paragraph is to be deemed for all purposes to have come into force with those modifications.Staff13 (1) A transfer scheme may provide for a person employed by the new policing body to become—(a) a member of the civilian staff of the police force, or(b) a member of staff of a local authority.(2) The scheme may provide that a contract of employment which the person had before becoming a member of the civilian staff of a police force is to have effect (subject to any modifications) as if originally made between that person and the chief officer.(3) The scheme may provide that a contract of employment which the person had before becoming a member of the staff of a local authority is to have effect (subject to any modifications) as if originally made between that person and that local authority.(2) 
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13) SCHEDULE 15 – Police reform: transitional provision Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)
243
14 (1) A transfer scheme may provide, in the case of a person who is seconded to the new policing body, that the secondment is to have effect as a secondment to—(a) the civilian staff of the police force, or(b) a local authority.(2) The scheme may make provision as to the terms and conditions which are to have effect as the terms and conditions of the person's secondment.15 (1) A transfer scheme may provide for the transfer to the chief officer of the rights, powers, duties and liabilities of the employer under or in connection with the contract of employment of a person who becomes a member of the civilian staff of the police force.(2) A transfer scheme may provide for the transfer to a local authority of the rights, powers, duties and liabilities of the employer under or in connection with the contract of employment of a person who becomes a member of the staff of that local authority.(3) A transfer scheme may make provision—(a) for periods before a person became a member of the civilian staff of the police force to count as periods of employment with the chief officer, and(b) for periods before a person became a member of the civilian staff of the police force, and the periods after the person became a member of the civilian staff of the police force, to count as a period of continuous employment.(4) A transfer scheme may make provision—(a) for periods before a person became a member of the staff of a local authority to count as periods of employment with that local authority, and(b) for periods before a person became a member of the staff of a local authority, and the period after the person became a member of the staff of the local authority, to count as a period of continuous employment.16 (1) A transfer scheme may provide for a person who—(a) is employed by the new policing body, and(b) would otherwise, by the operation of the scheme, become—(i) a member of the civilian staff of the police force, or(ii) a member of staff of a local authority,(i) 
244	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 15 – Police reform: transitional provisionDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)not to become such a member of staff if the person gives notice objecting to the operation of the scheme in relation to the person.(2) A person who would (but for this sub-paragraph) be treated as being dismissed by the operation of a transfer scheme (whether by an enactment or otherwise) is to be treated as not being so dismissed.(3) Sub-paragraph (2) does not apply to a person who, by virtue of sub-paragraph (1), does not become a member of staff.Property, rights and liabilities etc17 (1) A transfer scheme may provide for the transfer of property, rights and liabilities of the new policing body to the chief officer.(2) The scheme may—(a) create rights or interests, or impose liabilities, in relation to property, rights and liabilities transferred by virtue of the scheme or retained by the transferor under the scheme or create rights or liabilities as between the transferor and transferee under the scheme, and(b) apportion property, rights and liabilities between the new policing body and the chief officer.Supplementary18 (1) A transfer scheme may contain further provision in connection with any of the matters to which paragraphs 13 to 17 relate.(2) A transfer scheme may contain incidental, consequential, supplemental, transitional and saving provision.(3) A transfer scheme may confer functions on any person (including the Secretary of State).19 (1) A transfer scheme may contain provision—1 
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13) SCHEDULE 15 – Police reform: transitional provision Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)
245
(a) for the Secretary of State, or any other person nominated by or in accordance with the scheme, to determine any matter requiring determination under or in consequence of the scheme, and(b) as to the payment of fees charged, or expenses incurred, by any person nominated to determine any matter by virtue of sub-paragraph (a).PART 4OTHER TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONPolitically restricted posts20 (1) This paragraph applies to a person if by virtue of a transfer scheme, the person—(a) ceases to be a member of the staff of an existing police authority, and(b) becomes a member of the staff of a new policing body.(2) Section 1 of the Local Government and Housing Act 1989 (politically restricted posts) does not apply to the person for as long as the person—(a) continues to be a member of the staff of the new policing body, and(b) carries out duties which are the same, or substantially the same, as the duties the person carried out as a member of the staff of the existing police authority.Continuity21 (1) The abolition of an existing police authority, the transfer or abolition of its functions, and the transfer of its property, rights and liabilities, do not affect the validity of anything done before the abolition or transfer.(2) The replacement of an existing chief officer, the transfer or abolition of the functions of an existing chief officer, and the transfer of the rights and liabilities of an existing chief officer, do not affect anything done before the replacement, transfer or abolition.(3) The transfer of the property, rights and liabilities of a new policing body does not affect anything done before the transfer.(4) Sub-paragraphs (5) to (7) apply where any functions, property, rights or liabilities are transferred by or under this Act from a person (the “transferor”) to another person (the “transferee”).(2) 
246	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 15 – Police reform: transitional provisionDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)(5) There may be continued by or in relation to the transferee anything (including legal proceedings) which—(a) relates to any of the functions, property, rights or liabilities transferred, and(b) is in the process of being done by or in relation to the transferor immediately before the transfer takes effect.(6) Anything which—(a) was made or done by or in relation to the transferor for the purposes of, or otherwise in connection with, any of the functions, property, rights or liabilities transferred, and  (b) is in effect immediately before the transfer takes effect, has effect as if made or done by or in relation to the transferee.(7) The transferee is to be substituted for the transferor in any instruments, contracts or legal proceedings which—(a) relate to any of the functions, property, rights or liabilities transferred, and(b) are made or commenced before the transfer takes effect.(8) The Secretary of State may, by direction, determine any question under this section as to—(a) whether any particular functions, property, rights or liabilities are transferred by or under this Act, or(b) the person to which any particular functions, property, rights or liabilities are transferred by or under this Act.(9) The preceding provisions of this paragraph—(a) are without prejudice to Part 2 of this Schedule and any power to make a transfer scheme, and(b) are subject to the provisions of Part 2 of this Schedule and any transfer scheme.(10) In this paragraph a reference to the transfer of a function includes a reference to the abolition of the function and the conferral of a corresponding function on another person.Foreign property etc: perfection of vesting22 (1) Subsections (2) to (8) of section 414 of the Greater London Authority Act 1999 (foreign property, rights and liabilities: perfection of vesting) apply in any case where a transfer by or under this Act provides for the transfer of foreign property, rights or liabilities.(2) In the application of those provisions by virtue of sub-paragraph (1)—(a) references to a transfer or pension instrument have effect as references to the transfer by or under this Act; and(a) 
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13) SCHEDULE 15 – Police reform: transitional provision Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)
247
(b) references to the transferor and the transferee are to be construed accordingly.Transfers: supplementary provision23 (1) All property, rights and liabilities to which a statutory transfer applies are to be transferred by that transfer, notwithstanding that they may be or include—(a) property, rights and liabilities that would not otherwise be capable of being transferred, or(b) rights and liabilities under enactments.(2) The property, rights and liabilities which may be transferred by a transfer scheme include—(a) property, rights and liabilities that would not otherwise be capable of being transferred, or(b) rights and liabilities under enactments.(3) No right of reverter, right of pre-emption, right of forfeiture, right of re-entry, right to compensation, option or similar right affecting any land or other property shall operate or become exercisable as a result of any transfer of land or other property by virtue of a statutory transfer or a transfer scheme (whether or not any consent required to the transfer has been obtained).(4) No right to terminate or vary a contract or instrument shall operate or become exercisable, and no provision of a contract or relevant document, shall operate or become exercisable or be contravened, by reason of any transfer by virtue of a statutory transfer or a transfer scheme.(5) Sub-paragraphs (2) to (4) above have effect in relation to—(a) the grant or creation of an estate or interest in, or right over, any land or other property, or  (b) the doing of any other thing in relation to land or other property, as they have effect in relation to a transfer of land or other property.(6) A transfer scheme may make provision for the apportionment or division of any property, rights or liabilities.(7) Where a transfer scheme makes provision for the apportionment or division between two or more persons of any rights or liabilities under a contract, the contract shall have effect, as from the coming into force of the provision, as if it constituted two or more separate contracts separately enforceable by and against each of those persons respectively as respects the part of the rights or liabilities which falls to that person as a result of the apportionment or division.(8) The provision that may be made by a transfer scheme includes provision for—(a) any transfer of land or other property by virtue of the instrument,(b) the grant or creation of any estate or interest in, or right over, any land or other property by virtue of the instrument, or(a) 
248	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 15 – Police reform: transitional provisionDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)(c) the doing of any other thing in relation to land or other property by virtue of the instrument,to be on such terms, including financial terms, as the person making the scheme thinks fit.(9) The Secretary of State may by order confer on any body or person to whom property, rights or liabilities are transferred by a statutory transfer or transfer scheme any statutory functions which were previously exercisable in relation to that property, or those rights or liabilities, by the transferor.(10) It shall be the duty—(a) of existing police authorities, new policing bodies, existing chief officers, new chief officers and local authorities, and(b) of the trustees or managers, or administrators, of any pension scheme,to provide the Secretary of State with such information or assistance as the Secretary of State may reasonably require for the purposes of, or in connection with, the exercise of any powers exercisable by the Secretary of State in relation to a statutory transfer or a transfer scheme.(11) Where any person is entitled, in consequence of any transfer made by virtue of a statutory transfer or transfer scheme, to possession of a document relating in part to the title to, or to the management of, any land or other property in England and Wales—(a) the instrument may contain provision for treating that person as having given another person an acknowledgment in writing of the right of that other person to the production of the document and to delivery of copies thereof; and(b) section 64 of the Law of Property Act 1925 (production and safe custody of documents) shall have effect accordingly, and on the basis that the acknowledgment did not contain any such expression of contrary intention as is mentioned in that section.(12) In this paragraph—“relevant document” means—(a) any enactment, other than an enactment contained in this Act;(b) any subordinate legislation made otherwise than under this Act; or(c) any deed or other instrument;“statutory transfer” means a transfer under Part 1 or 2 of this Schedule; “transfer scheme” means a transfer scheme under Part 3.Power to make transitional provision etc24 (1) The Secretary of State may, by order, make such transitional and transitory provision, and savings, as the Secretary of State considers appropriate in connection with Part 1 of this Act (including provision that supplements or varies the provision made by this Schedule).1 
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13) SCHEDULE 15 – Police reform: transitional provision Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)
249
(2) An order under this paragraph may, in particular—(a) amend, or otherwise modify, any enactment;(b) make any provision that may be made by a transfer scheme under Part 3 of this Schedule (whether the provision in the order relates to that Part or Part 2 of this Schedule);(c) provide for the new policing body for a police area to make any payment which—(i) before a day specified in the order could have been made out of the police fund of the existing police authority for that area, but(ii) is not a liability which is transferred to the new policing body by virtue of Part 2 of this Schedule;(d) provide for a new chief officer or a local authority to which property, rights or liabilities of a new policing body are, or are to be, transferred by virtue of a transfer scheme under Part 3 of this Schedule to make any payment which—(i) before a day specified in the order could have been made out of the police fund of that new policing body, but(ii) is not a liability which could be transferred by virtue of such a transfer scheme;(e) make provision in relation to the accounts and audit of—(i) existing police authorities, and(ii) new policing bodies.(3) Provision of the kind referred to in sub-paragraph (2)(e) may, in particular—(a) amend, or otherwise modify, any enactment relating to the accounts and audit of public bodies in its application to—(i) an existing police authority and the financial year in which that authority is abolished, or(ii) a new policing body and the financial year in which that body is established;(b) provide for the Secretary of State to give directions as to action to be taken in relation to the accounts and audit of—(i) an existing police authority in relation to the financial year in which that authority is abolished, or(ii) a new policing body in relation to the financial year in which that body is established;(c) provide for a person who, in acting in accordance with such a direction, fails to comply with a code of practice or other document relating to proper accounting practice to be taken not to have so failed to comply.
25 In this Schedule—
PART 5INTERPRETATION
250	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 15 – Police reform: transitional provisionDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)“existing chief officer” means—(a) in relation to a police area listed in Schedule 1 to the Police Act 1996, the chief constable of the police force for that area before the coming into force of section 2 of this Act in relation to that area;(b) in relation to the metropolitan police district, the Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis immediately before the coming into force of section 4;“existing police authority” means—(a) in relation to a police area listed in Schedule 1 to the Police Act 1996, the police authority established under section 3 of that Act for that area;(b) in relation to the metropolitan police district, the Metropolitan Police Authority;“local authority” means—(a) in relation to England, a county council or a district council;(b) in relation to Wales, a county council or a county borough council; “new chief officer” means—(a) in relation to a police area listed in Schedule 1 to the Police Act 1996, the chief constable established for that police area under section 2 of this Act;(b) in relation to the metropolitan police district, the Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis established under section 4;“new policing body” means—(a) in relation to a police area listed in Schedule 1 to the Police Act 1996, the police and crime commissioner for that area;(b) in relation to the metropolitan police district, the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime;“police force” means—(a) in relation to a police area listed in Schedule 1 to the Police Act 1996, the police force maintained for that area under section 2 of that Act;(b) in relation to the metropolitan police district, the metropolitan police force;  “transfer scheme”, in relation to an existing police authority, means a scheme for transferring staff, property, rights or liabilities of that authority.
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 16 – Police reform: minor and consequential amendments Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)
251
SCHEDULE 16	Section 99POLICE REFORM: MINOR AND CONSEQUENTIAL AMENDMENTSPART 1POLICE ACT 19961 The Police Act 1996 is amended in accordance with this Part.2 For the italic cross-heading before section 1 substitute— “ Police areas and police forces ”.3 Omit the italic cross-heading before section 2.4 (1) Section 2 (maintenance of police forces) is amended in accordance with this paragraph.(2) The existing provision of section 2 becomes subsection (1) of that section.(3) After that subsection, insert—“(2) For further provision about the maintenance of those police forces, see Chapter 1 of Part 1 of the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011.”.5 Omit—(a) sections 3 to 5, and(b) the italic cross-heading before section 5A.
252	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 16 – Police reform: minor and consequential amendmentsDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)6 (1) Section 5A (maintenance of the metropolitan police force) is amended in accordance with this paragraph.(2) The existing provision of section 5A becomes subsection (1) of that section.(3) After that subsection, insert—“(2) For further provision about the maintenance of the metropolitan police force, see Chapter 2 of Part 1 of the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011.”.7 Omit sections 5B to 6.8 Before section 6ZA insert the following cross-heading— “ The City of London ”.9 After that cross-heading insert—Common Council to remain police authority for City“6AZA The Common Council of the City of London is to continue to be the police authority for the City of London police area.”.10 (1) Section 6ZA (power to confer particular functions on police authorities) is amended in accordance with this paragraph.(2) In the title, for “police authorities” substitute “ the Common Council ”.(3) In subsection (1), for “police authorities” substitute “ the Common Council ”.(4) In subsection (2)—(a) for “a police authority” substitute “ the Common Council ”;(b) for “police force maintained for its area” substitute “ the City of London police force ”;(c) for “the authority” substitute “ the Common Council ”.(5) In subsection (3), for paragraphs (a) and (b) substitute— “(a)	the Common Council,(2) 
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 16 – Police reform: minor and consequential amendments Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)(b)	the Commissioner of Police for the City of London, and”.(6) Omit subsection (4).
253
11 (1) Section 6ZB (plans by police authorities) is amended in accordance with this paragraph.(2) In the title, for “police authorities” substitute “ the Common Council ”.(3) In subsection (1)—(a) for “every police authority” substitute “ the Common Council ”;(b) for “the authority's” substitute “the Common Council's”;(c) for “its area” substitute “ the City of London police area, and for the discharge by the City of London Police of its national or international functions ”.(4) For subsection (2) substitute—“(2) In issuing a policing plan, the Common Council must have regard to the strategic policing requirement issued under section 37A.”.(5) In subsection (3)—(a) for “a police authority” substitute “ the Common Council ”;(b) for “relevant chief officer of police” substitute “ Commissioner of Police for the City of London ”;(c) for “the authority” substitute “ the Common Council ”.(6) In subsection (4)—(a) for “a police authority” substitute “ the Common Council ”;(b) for “relevant chief officer of police” (in the first place) substitute “ Commissioner of Police for the City of London ”;(c) for “authority for” substitute “ Common Council for ”;(d) for “Authority shall” substitute “ Common Council shall ”;(e) for “relevant chief officer of police” (in the second place) substitute “ Commissioner of Police for the City of London ”.(7) In subsection (8), for paragraphs (a) and (b) substitute— “(a)	the Common Council,(b)	the Commissioner of Police for the City of London, and”.(8) Omit subsection (9).(9) Omit subsection (11).
254	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 16 – Police reform: minor and consequential amendmentsDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)12 (1) Section 6ZC (reports by police authorities) is amended in accordance with this paragraph.(2) In the title, for “police authorities” substitute “ the Common Council ”.(3) In subsection (1)—(a) for “police authorities” substitute “ the Common Council ”;(b) for “policing of their areas” substitute “ discharge of the Common Council's functions ”.(4) In subsection (3), for paragraphs (a) and (b) substitute— “(a)	the Common Council,(b)	the Commissioner of Police for the City of London, and”.(5) Omit subsection (4).13 Omit sections 8A to 9G.14 Before section 9H insert the following cross-heading— “ Police ranks ”.15 Omit sections 10 to 12A.16 Omit sections 14 to 17.17 Before section 18 insert the following cross-heading— “ City of London ”.1 
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 16 – Police reform: minor and consequential amendments Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)
255
18 (1) Section 18 (supply of goods and services) is amended in accordance with this paragraph.(2) In subsection (1), omit paragraph (a).(3) In subsection (1)(b)—(a) for “shall also apply with that modification” substitute “ shall, ”;(b) at the end insert “ , apply with the modification set out in subsection (2) ”.(4) In subsection (3)—(a) for “A police authority” substitute “ The Common Council in its capacity as police authority ”;(b) for “another police authority” substitute “ another local policing body ”;(c) for “a police authority collaboration agreement” substitute “ force collaboration provision in a collaboration agreement ”.19 Omit sections 19 to 21.20 Omit the cross-heading “General provisions” before section 22.21 (1) Section 22 (reports by chief constables to police authorities) is amended as follows.(2) In subsection (1)—(a) for “Every chief officer of police of a police force” substitute “ The Commissioner of Police for the City of London ”;(b) for “police authority” substitute “ Common Council ”;(c) for the words from “the area” to “maintained” substitute “ the City of London police area ”.(3) In subsection (2), for “A chief officer” substitute “ The chief constable ”.(4) In subsection (3)—(a) for “The chief officer of police of a police force” substitute “ The Commissioner of Police for the City of London ”;(b) for “police authority” substitute “ Common Council ”;(c) for “that authority” substitute “ the Common Council ”;(d) for “area for which the force is maintained” substitute “ City of London police area ”.(a) 
256	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 16 – Police reform: minor and consequential amendmentsDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)(5) In subsection (4), for “police authority” substitute “ Common Council ”.(6) In subsection (5)—(a) for “chief officer” substitute “ Commissioner of Police for the City of London ”;(b) for “police authority” substitute “ Common Council ”;(c) for “that authority” substitute “ the Common Council ”.(7) In subsection (6)—(a) for “police authority” substitute “ Common Council ”;(b) for “the authority” substitute “ the Common Council ”.22 After section 22 insert the following cross-heading— “ General provisions ”.23 (1) Section 24 (aid of one police force by another) is amended as follows.(2) In subsection (3), for “sections 9A and 10(1)” substitute “ sections 2 and 4 of the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (“the 2011 Act”) ”.(3) For subsection (3A) substitute—“(3A) While a member of the civilian staff of a police force maintained under section 2, or a member of the civilian staff of the metropolitan police force, is provided under this section for the assistance of another police force, that member of staff is, notwithstanding section 2 or 4 of the 2011 Act, under the direction and control of the chief officer of police of that other force.”.(4) In subsection (4)—(a) for “police authority” (in both places) substitute “ local policing body ”;(b) for “those authorities” substitute “ those bodies ”;(c) for “police authorities” substitute “ local policing bodies ”.(5) In subsection (4A)—(a) for “police authority” substitute “ local policing body ”;(b) for “section 10(1)” substitute “ sections 2 and 4 of the 2011 Act ”.24 In section 25(1) (provision of special services)—(a) for “police authority” substitute “ local policing body ”;(b) for “that authority” substitute “ that body ”.(a) 
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 16 – Police reform: minor and consequential amendments Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)
257
25 (1) Section 26 (provision of advice and assistance to international organisations etc) is amended in accordance with this paragraph.(2) In subsection (1)—(a) for “police authority” substitute “ local policing body ”;(b) for “the authority” substitute “ the body ”.(3) In subsection (2)—(a) for “police authority” substitute “ local policing body ”;(b) for “the authority” substitute “ the body ”.(4) In subsections (5) and (6), for “police authority” substitute “ local policing body ”.26 In section 27 (special constables), in subsection (2), for “police force collaboration agreement” substitute “ collaboration agreement ”.27 In section 28 (police cadets), in subsection (3)—(a) for “Without prejudice to subsection (2)” substitute “ Accordingly ”;(b) for “the police authority that maintains a police force” substitute “ the chief officer of a police force ”.28 (1) Section 30 (jurisdiction of constables) is amended in accordance with this paragraph.(2) In subsection (3A)—(a) for “section 24” substitute “ section 22A ”;(b) for “police authority” substitute “ local policing body ”.(3) In subsection (3B), for “police force collaboration agreement under section 23” substitute “ collaboration agreement under section 22A ”.29 For section 31 (rewards for diligence) substitute—1 
258	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 16 – Police reform: minor and consequential amendmentsDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)“31 Rewards for diligence(1) The chief constable of a police force maintained under section 2 may grant to members of that police force rewards for exceptional diligence or other specially meritorious conduct.(2) The Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis may grant to members of the metropolitan police force rewards for exceptional diligence or other specially meritorious conduct.(3) The Common Council may, on the recommendation of the Commissioner of Police for the City of London, grant out of the City of London police fund to members of the City of London police force rewards for exceptional diligence or other specially meritorious conduct.”.30 (1) Section 39A (codes of practice for chief officers) is amended as follows.(2) Omit subsection (3).F228(3) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .31 (1) Section 42A is amended in accordance with this paragraph.(2) In the title, for “removal of senior officers” substitute “ exercise of powers under section 42 ”.(3) In subsection (1), omit “9E, 11 or”.(4) In subsection (2), for paragraph (a) substitute—“(a)	the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime;”.32 In section 50 (regulations for police forces), in subsection (4)(a), for “police authorities” substitute “ local policing bodies ”.1 
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 16 – Police reform: minor and consequential amendments Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)
259
33 In section 51 (regulations for special constables), in subsection (3A)(a), for “police authorities” substitute “ local policing bodies ”.34 In section 52 (regulations for police cadets), in subsection (1A)(a), for “police authorities” substitute “ local policing bodies ”.35 (1) Section 53A (regulation of procedures and practices) is amended in accordance with this paragraph.(2) In subsection (2), omit paragraph (b) (and the word “and” at the end of paragraph (a)).F229(3) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .(4) Omit subsection (5).(5) In subsection (6), omit paragraph (a).36 (1) Section 57 (common services) is amended in accordance with this paragraph.(2) In subsection (4), for paragraph (a) substitute—“(a)	such persons as appear to the Secretary of State to represent the views of police and crime commissioners,(aa)	the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime, (ab)	the Common Council,”.(3) Omit subsections (5) and (6).
260	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 16 – Police reform: minor and consequential amendmentsDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)37 In section 60 (regulations for Police Federations), in subsection (2)—(a) in paragraph (c), after “Federations to” insert “ local policing bodies, ”;(b) in paragraph (d), after “provided by” insert “ local policing bodies or ”.F23038	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .39 In section 63 (Police Advisory Boards for England and Wales and for Scotland), in subsection (2), after “interests” insert “ of local policing bodies, ”.40 In section 84 (representation etc at disciplinary and other proceedings), in the definition of “relevant authority” in subsection (4)—(a) in paragraph (a), for “a senior officer” substitute “ the chief officer of police ”;(b) in paragraph (b), for “a senior officer, the police authority” substitute “ the chief officer of police, the local policing body ”.41 In section 87 (guidance concerning disciplinary proceedings etc), in subsection (1)—(a) for paragraph (a) substitute—“(a)  local policing bodies,”;(b) for paragraph (e), substitute—“(e) members of the civilian staff of a police force, including the metropolitan police force (within the meaning of Part 1 of the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011).”.
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 16 – Police reform: minor and consequential amendments Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)
261
42 (1) Section 88 (liability of wrongful acts of constables) is amended in accordance with this paragraph.(2) In subsections (2)(b) and (4), for “police authority” substitute “ local policing body ”.(3) In subsection (5)—(a) in paragraph (a), for “police authority” substitute “ local policing body ”;(b) in paragraph (c), for “authority's” substitute “local policing body's”.(4) In subsection (5A), for “police authority” (in each place) substitute “ local policing body ”.(5) In subsection (6), for “police authority” (in each place) substitute “ local policing body ”.43 In section 93 (acceptance of gifts or loans), in subsection (1), for “the authority” substitute “ the body ”.44 In section 97 (police officers engaged on service outside their force), in subsection (2), for “police authority” (in each place) substitute “ local policing body ”.45 (1) Section 98 (cross-border aid of one police force by another) is amended in accordance with this paragraph.(2) In subsection (6)—(a) for “police authority” (in each place) substitute “ local policing body ”;(b) for “those authorities” substitute “ those bodies ”;(c) for “police authorities” substitute “ local policing bodies ”.(3) Before subsection (7) insert—“(6B) In this section “local policing body” includes—(a) a police authority in Scotland, and(b) the Northern Ireland Policing Board.”.46 Omit Schedules 2 and 2A.39 
262	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 16 – Police reform: minor and consequential amendmentsDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)47 (1) Schedule 6 (appeals to Police Appeals Tribunals) is amended in accordance with this paragraph.(2) In paragraph 2(1)—(a) for “four members” substitute “ three members ”;F231(b)	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .(c) in sub-paragraph (b), at the end insert “ and ”;(d) omit sub-paragraph (c).(3) In paragraph 9, for “relevant police authority” (in each place) substitute “ relevant local policing body ”.(4) In paragraph 10(b), for “relevant police authority” means the police authority” substitute “relevant local policing body” means the local policing body”.PART 2GREATER LONDON AUTHORITY ACT 199948 The Greater London Authority Act 1999 is amended in accordance with this Part.49 In section 45 (Mayor's periodic report to Assembly), in subsection (7)(b), for “Metropolitan Police Authority” substitute “ Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime ”.50 In section 54 (discharge of functions by committees or single members), omit subsection (6).39 
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 16 – Police reform: minor and consequential amendments Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)
263
51 In section 61 (power to require attendance at Assembly meetings), in subsection (12), omit paragraph (a).52 In section 86 (provisions supplemental to section 85), in subsection (2), for “Metropolitan Police Authority” substitute “ Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime ”.53 (1) Section 90 (the special item for the purposes of section 89) is amended as follows.(2) In subsection (1), for “Metropolitan Police Authority” substitute “ Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime ”.(3) In subsection (2)—(a) for “Metropolitan Police Authority” (in each place) substitute “ Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime ”;(b) in paragraph (b), for “that Authority” substitute “ that Office ”.54 In section 389 (the Superannuation Act 1972), in subsection (1)(d), for “Metropolitan Police Authority” substitute “ Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime ”.55 In section 404 (discrimination), in subsection (1)(b), for “Metropolitan Police Authority” substitute “ Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime ”.56 In section 408 (transfers of property, rights or liabilities), in subsection (2), for paragraph (f) substitute—“(f)	a police and crime commissioner;”.
264	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 16 – Police reform: minor and consequential amendmentsDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)57 In section 411 (pensions), omit subsection (9).58 In section 419 (taxation), in subsection (1)(b), for “Metropolitan Police Authority” substitute “ Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime ”.59 In Schedule 4 (exercise of functions during vacancy or temporary incapacity of Mayor), omit—(a) paragraph 9, and(b) paragraph 17.PART 3OTHER ENACTMENTSTramways Act 187060 In the Tramways Act 1870, in the heading of section 61 (power for local or police authorities to regulate traffic in roads), for “local or police authorities” substitute “ local authorities and police ”.Riot (Damages) Act 1886F23261	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 16 – Police reform: minor and consequential amendments Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)
265
Police (Property) Act 189762 (1) In the Police (Property) Act 1897, section 2 (regulations with respect to unclaimed property in possession of police) is amended as follows.(2) In subsection (2A)—(a) for “relevant authority” (in each place) substitute “ relevant body ”;(b) in paragraph (d), for “the authority” substitute “ the relevant body ”.(3) In subsection (2B)—(a) for “relevant authority” substitute “ relevant body ”;(b) for “police authority” substitute “ local policing body ”.Licensing Act 190263 In the Licensing Act 1902, in section 6 (prohibition on sale of liquor to persons declared to be habitual drunkards), for “police authority” (in each place) substitute “ local policing body ”.Local Government (Emergency Provisions) Act 191664 In the Local Government (Emergency Provisions) Act 1916, in section 21 (interpretation), after “Provided that where any such authority is” insert “ a local policing body or ”.Police, Factories, &c (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 191665 (1) In the Police, Factories, &c (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1916, section 5 (regulation of street collections) is amended as follows.(2) In subsection (1A), for paragraph (b) substitute—“(b)	the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime, and”.(3) In subsection (2)(b), for “a police authority” substitute “ the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime ”.(2) 
266	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 16 – Police reform: minor and consequential amendmentsDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)Children and Young Persons Act 193366 The Children and Young Persons Act 1933 is amended as follows.67 In section 7 (sale of tobacco, etc, to persons under 18), in subsection (3), for “police authority” substitute “ local policing body ”.68 In section 12 (failing to provide for safety of children at entertainments), in subsection (5)(b), for “police authority” substitute “ chief officer of police ”.Reserve and Auxiliary Forces (Protection of Civil Interests) Act 195169 The Reserve and Auxiliary Forces (Protection of Civil Interests) Act 1951 is amended as follows.70 In section 18 (protection of tenure, in connection with employment, under a licence or a rent-free letting, by extension of the Rent Acts), in subsection (6)—(a) after “either by the” insert “ relevant local policing body or ”;(b) for “that authority” substitute “ that body or authority ”.71 In section 20 (modifications of Rent Acts as respects occupation by employees), in subsection (3)(b), after “required by the” insert “ relevant local policing body or ”.62 
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 16 – Police reform: minor and consequential amendments Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)
267
72 In section 23 (interpretation of Part 2), in subsection (1), in the definition of “relevant police authority”—(a) for “ “relevant police authority”” substitute “ “relevant local policing body” or “relevant police authority””;(b) for “the police authority” substitute “ the local policing body or the police authority ”.73 In Schedule 2 (capacities in respect of which payments may be made under Part 5, and paying authorities), in Part 1, in the second column of entry number 4, at the beginning insert “ The local policing body or ”.Town and Country Planning Act 195974 In the Town and Country Planning Act 1959, in Part 1 of Schedule 4 (authorities in England and Wales to whom Part 2 applies), omit paragraph 8.Land Compensation Act 196175 In the Land Compensation Act 1961, in section 29 (interpretation of Part 4), in the definition of “local authority” in subsection (1), in paragraph (a) omit “, or a combined police authority”.Trustee Investments Act 196176 The Trustee Investments Act 1961 is amended as follows.62 
268	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 16 – Police reform: minor and consequential amendmentsDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)77 In section 11 (Local Authority investment schemes), in subsection (4)(a), for the words from “police authority” to “1996” substitute “ police and crime commissioner ”.78 In Schedule 1 (manner of investment), in Part 2 (narrower-range of investments requiring advice), in paragraph 9, for paragraph (d) substitute—“(d)	a police and crime commissioner;”.Local Government (Records) Act 196279 The Local Government (Records) Act 1962 is amended as follows.80 In section 2 (acquisition and deposit of records), in subsection (6), omit the words from “to a police authority” to “Metropolitan Police Authority,”.81 In section 8 (interpretation), in subsection (1), omit the words from “a police authority” to “Metropolitan Police Authority,”.Pipe-lines Act 196282 In the Pipe-lines Act 1962, in section 37 (fire brigades, police etc to be notified of certain pipe-line accidents and to be furnished with information), in subsections (1)(a) and (2)(a), after “rescue authority” insert “ , local policing body ”.
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 16 – Police reform: minor and consequential amendments Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)
269
Offices, Shops and Railway Premises Act 196383 In the Offices, Shops and Railway Premises Act 1963, in section 90 (interpretation), in subsection (4)(c), after “maintained by” insert “ a local policing body or ”.Local Government Act 196684 In the Local Government Act 1966, in section 11 (grants for certain expenditure due to ethnic minority population), in subsection (2) for the words from “police authority” to “Metropolitan Police Authority” substitute “ police and crime commissioner, the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime ”.Leasehold Reform Act 196785 (1) In the Leasehold Reform Act 1967, section 28 (retention or resumption of land required for public purposes) is amended in accordance with this paragraph.(2) In subsection (5)(a), for the words from “police authority” to “Metropolitan Police Authority” substitute “ police and crime commissioner and the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime ”.(3) In subsection (6), omit the second paragraph (a) (which appears after “However—”).Superannuation (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 196786 The Superannuation (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1967 is amended as follows.62 
270	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 16 – Police reform: minor and consequential amendmentsDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)87 (1) Section 11 (pensions of certain persons transferring to different employment) is amended in accordance with this paragraph.(2) In subsection (8), for “police authority” substitute “ police pension authority ”.(3) After subsection (8) insert—“(9) In this section “police pension authority” means—(a) the chief constable of any police force maintained under section 2 of the Police Act 1996;(b) the Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis;(c) the Common Council of the City of London in its capacity as a police authority; and(d) any police authority within the meaning of the Police (Scotland) Act 1967.”.88 (1) Section 15 (superannuation of metropolitan civil staffs) is amended in accordance with this paragraph.(2) In subsection (1), in paragraph (a)(i), for “Metropolitan Police Authority” substitute “ Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime or the Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis ”.(3) For subsection (2) substitute—“(2) The Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime shall have power to grant pensions or other benefits to or in respect of persons who are members of the metropolitan civil staffs by virtue of employment by that Office.(2ZA) The Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis shall have power to grant pensions or other benefits to or in respect of persons who are members of the metropolitan civil staffs by virtue of employment by the Commissioner.”.(4) In subsection (2A)—(a) for “Metropolitan Police Authority” substitute “ Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime, and the Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis, ”;(b) for “it” substitute “ that Office or Commissioner ”.(5) In subsection (6), for “and with the Metropolitan Police Authority” substitute “ with the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime, and with the Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis ”.(6) In subsection (7), for “Metropolitan Police Authority” substitute “ Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime or the Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis ”.(2) 
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 16 – Police reform: minor and consequential amendments Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)Firearms Act 196889 The Firearms Act 1968 is amended as follows.
271
90 In section 54 (application of Parts 1 and 2 to Crown servants), for subsection (3)(b) substitute—“(b)	a civilian officer, or”.91 In section 57 (interpretation), in subsection (4), for the definition of “civilian officer” substitute—““civilian officer” means—(a) as respects England and Wales—(i) a person employed by a chief constable established under section 2 of the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011,(ii) a person employed by the Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis, or(iii) a person employed by the Corporation of the City of London who is under the direction and control of the Commissioner of Police for the City of London;(b) as respects Scotland, a person employed by a police authority who is under the direction and control of a chief officer of police;”.Employers' Liability (Compulsory Insurance) Act 196992 In the Employers' Liability (Compulsory Insurance) Act 1969, in section 3 (employers exempted from insurance), in subsection (2)(b), for “and any police authority” substitute “ , any local policing body, any chief constable established under section 2 of the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011, and the Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis ”.62 
272	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 16 – Police reform: minor and consequential amendmentsDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)Local Government Grants (Social Need) Act 196993 In the Local Government Grants (Social Need) Act 1969, in section 1 (provision of grants), in subsection (3), for the words from “police authority” to “Metropolitan Police Authority” substitute “ police and crime commissioner, the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime ”.Local Authorities (Goods and Services) Act 197094 In the Local Authorities (Goods and Services) Act 1970, in section 1 (supply of goods and services by local authorities), in the definition of “public body” in subsection (4), for the words from “police authority” to “1996” substitute “ police and crime commissioner ”.Pensions (Increase) Act 197195 The Pensions (Increase) Act 1971 is amended as follows.96 In Schedule 2 (official pensions), Part 2 (pensions out of local funds) is amended in accordance with paragraphs 97 and 98.97 (1) Paragraph 51 is amended in accordance with this paragraph.(2) For “police authority” (in the first place) substitute “ local policing body or a chief officer of police ”.(3) In sub-paragraph (a), for “such a police authority; or” substitute “ a police authority; ”.(4) After sub-paragraph (a), insert—“(aa)	service as a member of staff of a police and crime commissioner; (ab)	service as a member of staff of the Mayor's Office for Policing andCrime;(ac)	service as a member of the civilian staff of a police force; or”.
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 16 – Police reform: minor and consequential amendments Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)
273
(5) In sub-paragraph (b), for “by such a” substitute “ by a chief constable established under section 2 of the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011, by the Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis or by a ”.(6) After sub-paragraph (b) insert— “In this paragraph—(a) references to the staff of a police and crime commissioner, the staff of the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime, and the civilian staff of a police force, have the same meanings as in Part 1 of the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011;(b) “police force” includes the metropolitan police force.”.98 In paragraph 52, after “A pension payable by” insert “ a police and crime commissioner, the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime, a chief constable established under section 2 of the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011, the Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis or ”.99 In Schedule 6 (employments relevant to section 13(2)(a)), in sub-paragraph (c)—(a) after “Metropolitan Police Authority” insert “ or the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime ”;(b) after “employment” insert “ before the repeal of section 14(4) of the Police Act 1996 ”;(c) after “Fund” insert “ or employment after that repeal ”.Local Government Act 1972100 The Local Government Act 1972 is amended as follows.101 In section 60 (procedure for reviews), in subsection (2)(a)(i) and (c) and subsection (5)(b), for “police authority” substitute “ police and crime commissioner ”.62 
274	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 16 – Police reform: minor and consequential amendmentsDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)102 In section 98 (interpretation of sections 95 and 97), in subsection (1A) omit the words from “and a police authority” to “Metropolitan Police Authority”.103 In section 99 (meetings and proceedings of local authorities), omit the words from “police authorities” to “Metropolitan Police Authority,”.104 (1) Section 100J (application to new authorities, Common Council, etc) is amended in accordance with this paragraph.(2) In subsection (1), omit paragraphs (e) and (eza).(3) In subsection (3), omit “, (e), (eza)”.(4) In subsection (4)(a)—(a) after “economic prosperity board,” insert “ or ”;(b) omit the words from “or a police authority” to “Metropolitan Police Authority”.105 In section 101 (arrangements for discharge of functions by local authorities), in subsection (13) omit “except a police authority”.106 (1) Section 107 (application of foregoing provisions to police authorities) is amended as follows.(2) In the title, for “police authorities” substitute “ the Common Council ”.(3) For subsection (1) substitute—“(1) In their application to the Common Council as police authority, sections 101 to 106 shall have effect subject to the following provisions of this section (and in those provisions references to the Common Council are references to the Council as police authority).”.
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 16 – Police reform: minor and consequential amendments Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)
275
(4) In subsection (2)—(a) for “A police authority” substitute “ The Common Council ”;(b) for “another police authority” substitute “ another local policing body ”;(c) for “a police authority” substitute “ the Common Council ”.(5) In subsection (3)—(a) for “a police authority” substitute “ the Common Council ”;(b) for the words from “by” to the end substitute “ by the Common Council ”.(6) In subsection (3A)—(a) for “a police authority” substitute “ the Common Council ”;(b) for “the authority” substitute “ the Common Council ”;(c) for “the authority's” substitute “the Common Council's”.(7) In subsection (3B)—(a) for “a police authority” substitute “ the Common Council ”;(b) for “that authority” substitute “ the Common Council ”.(8) In subsection (4)—(a) for “a police authority” substitute “ the Common Council ”;(b) for “the authority” substitute “ the Common Council ”.(9) In subsection (4A)(c), for “a police authority” substitute “ the Common Council ”.(10) In subsection (5), for “a police authority” substitute “ the Common Council ”.(11) Omit subsection (7).(12) In subsection (8)—(a) for “a police authority” substitute “ the Common Council ”;(b) for “any such authority or authorities” substitute “ the Common Council ”;(c) for the words from “by” to the end, substitute “ by the Common Council ”.107 In section 120 (acquisition of land compulsorily by principal councils), after subsection (3) insert—“(3A) Police and crime commissioners and the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime are to be treated as principal councils for the purposes of—(a) this section (apart from subsection (1)(b)), and(b) section 121.”.108 (1) Section 146A (Joint Authorities) is amended in accordance with this paragraph.(2) In subsection (1)—
276	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 16 – Police reform: minor and consequential amendmentsDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)(a) after “joint waste authority,” insert “ and ”;(b) omit the words from “a police authority” to “Metropolitan Police Authority”.(3) Omit subsections (1A) to (1C).109 In section 223 (appearance of local authorities in legal proceedings), in subsection (2), for the words from “police authority” to “Metropolitan Police Authority” substitute “ police and crime commissioner and the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime ”.110 In section 228 (inspection of documents), in subsection (7A)—(a) after “economic prosperity board,” insert “ or ”;(b) omit the words from “or a police authority” to “Metropolitan Police Authority”.111 In section 229 (photographic copies of documents), in subsection (8), for the words from “and a police authority” to “Metropolitan Police Authority” substitute “ , a police and crime commissioner and the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime ”.112 In section 231 (service of notices on local authorities, etc), in subsection (4), for the words from “and a police authority” to “Metropolitan Police Authority” substitute “ , a police and crime commissioner and the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime ”.113 In section 232 (public notices), in subsection (1A), for the words from “and a police authority” to “Metropolitan Police Authority” substitute “ , a police and crime commissioner and the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime ”.62 
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 16 – Police reform: minor and consequential amendments Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)
277
114 In section 233 (service of notices by local authorities), in subsection (11), for the words from “and a police authority” to “Metropolitan Police Authority” substitute “ , a police and crime commissioner and the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime ”.115 In section 234 (authentication of documents), in subsection (4), for the words from “and a police authority” to “Metropolitan Police Authority” substitute “ , a police and crime commissioner and the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime ”.116 (1) Schedule 12 (meetings and proceedings of local authorities) is amended in accordance with this paragraph.(2) In paragraph 6A(1)—(a) after “economic prosperity board,” insert “ or ”;(b) omit the words from “or a police authority” to “Metropolitan Police Authority”.(3) In paragraph 6B, omit sub-paragraph (b) (and the word “and” that precedes it).(4) In paragraph 46, omit the words from “and a police authority” to “Metropolitan Police Authority”.Superannuation Act 1972117 (1) In the Superannuation Act 1972, in Schedule 1 (kinds of employment, etc, referred to in section 1), the entries headed “Other Bodies” are amended in accordance with this paragraph.(2) After the entry relating to employment by the Commissioner for Public Appointments in Scotland, insert— “ Employment by the Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis. ”.(3) For “The Metropolitan Police Authority.” substitute “ Employment by the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime. ”.(2) 
278	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 16 – Police reform: minor and consequential amendmentsDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)Employment Agencies Act 1973118 In the Employment Agencies Act 1973, in section 13 (interpretation), in subsection (7)—(a) in paragraph (f), omit the words from “, a police authority” to “1996”;(b) for paragraph (fa) substitute—“(fa) the exercise by a police and crime commissioner of any of the commissioner's functions;(fb) the exercise by the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime of any of that Office's functions;(fc) the exercise by a chief constable established under section 2 of the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 of any of the chief constable's functions;(fd) the exercise by the Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis of any of the Commissioner's functions;”.Health and Safety at Work etc Act 1974119 (1) In the Health and Safety at Work etc Act 1974, section 51A (application of Part to police) is amended as follows.(2) In subsection (2)—(a) in paragraph (a), for “means the chief officer of police” substitute “means—(i) the chief officer of police of that force, or(ii) in the case of a member of the force or a special constable who is, by virtue of a collaboration agreement under section 22A of the Police Act 1996, under the direction and control of a chief officer (within the meaning given by section 23I of that Act), that chief officer,”;(b) in paragraph (c), for “means the person who has the direction and control of the body of constables or cadets in question” substitute “means—(i) the person who has the direction and control of the body of constables or cadets in question, or(ii) in the case of a constable who is, by virtue of a collaboration agreement under section 22A of the Police Act 1996, under the direction and control of a chief officer (within the meaning given by section 23I of that Act), that chief officer.”.(3) In subsection (2A), after “shall” insert “ , if not a corporation sole, ”.(2) 
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 16 – Police reform: minor and consequential amendments Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)
279
Local Government Act 1974120 The Local Government Act 1974 is amended as follows.121 In section 25 (authorities subject to investigation), in subsection (1), for paragraphs (ca) and (caa) substitute—“(ca)	any police and crime commissioner;(caa)	the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime;”.122 In Schedule 5 (matters not subject to investigation), in paragraph 2 for “police authority” substitute “ local policing body ”.House of Commons Disqualification Act 1975123 In the House of Commons Disqualification Act 1975, in section 1 (disqualification of holders of certain offices and places), in subsection (1)(d) after “maintained by” insert “ a local policing body or ”.Northern Ireland Assembly Disqualification Act 1975124 In the Northern Ireland Assembly Disqualification Act 1975, in section 1 (disqualification of holders of certain offices and places), in subsection (1)(d) after “maintained by” insert “ a local policing body or ”.
280	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 16 – Police reform: minor and consequential amendmentsDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)Local Government (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1976125 The Local Government (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1976 is amended as follows.126 In section 30 (power to forego repayments of advances of remuneration paid to deceased employees), for subsection (3) substitute—“(3) For the purposes of this section—(a) the cases in which a person is in the employment of a local authority are to be taken to include cases where a person is a member of a police force maintained by a local authority; and(b) in such cases, references to employment are to be construed accordingly.”.127 In section 44 (interpretation etc of Part 1), in subsection (1), in paragraph (a) of the definition of “local authority”, for the words from “police authority” to “Metropolitan Police Authority” substitute “ police and crime commissioner, the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime ”.Police Pensions Act 1976128 The Police Pensions Act 1976 is amended as follows.129 In section 1 (police pensions regulations), in subsection (2A), for “police authorities” substitute “ police pension authorities ”.130 In section 6 (appeals)—(a) in subsection (1)(a), for “police authority” substitute “ police pension authority ”;(b) in subsection (2)—(a) 
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 16 – Police reform: minor and consequential amendments Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)
281
(i) for “police authority” substitute “ police pension authority ”;(ii) for “them” substitute “ that authority ”;(iii) for “they are” substitute “ that authority is ”;(c) in subsection (3), for “police authority” substitute “ police pension authority ”.131 In section 8A (information in connection with police pensions etc), for “police authority” (in each place) substitute “ police pension authority ”.132 (1) Section 11 (interpretation) is amended in accordance with this paragraph.(2) In subsection (2), the second paragraph (g) becomes paragraph (h).(3) In subsection (2), for the words before paragraph (a), substitute— “(2) In this Act—“police pension authority” means—(a) the chief constable of any police force maintained under section 2 of the Police Act 1996;(b) the Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis;(c) the Common Council of the City of London in its capacity as a police authority; and(d) any police authority within the meaning of the Police (Scotland) Act 1967;“pension supervising authority” means—(a) any local policing body within the meaning of the Police Act 1996; and(b) any police authority within the meaning of the Police (Scotland) Act 1967.(2A) But—”(and, accordingly, paragraphs (a) to (h) of subsection (2) become those paragraphs of subsection (2A)).(4) In subsection (2A), in paragraphs (a) to (h), for “it” (in each place) substitute “ “ police pension authority ” or “pension supervising authority” ”.133 In Schedule 1 (pensions under repealed enactments), in paragraph 2 (forfeiture of pensions), for “police authority” (in each place) substitute “ pension supervising authority ”.62 
282	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 16 – Police reform: minor and consequential amendmentsDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)Rent (Agriculture) Act 1976134 In the Rent (Agriculture) Act 1976, in section 5 (no statutory tenancy where landlord's interest belongs to Crown or to local authority etc), in subsection (3), for paragraph (baa) substitute—“(baa)  a police and crime commissioner;”.Rent Act 1977135 In the Rent Act 1977, in section 14 (landlord's interest belonging to local authority etc), in subsection (1), for paragraph (caa) substitute—“(caa)	a police and crime commissioner;”.Highways Act 1980136 The Highways Act 1980 is amended as follows.137 In section 118B (stopping up of certain highways for purposes of crime prevention etc), in subsection (6), for “police authority” substitute “ local policing body ”.138 In section 119B (diversion of certain highways for purposes of crime prevention etc), in subsection (6), for “police authority” substitute “ local policing body ”.
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 16 – Police reform: minor and consequential amendments Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)
283
139 In section 120 (exercise of powers of making public path extinguishment and diversion orders), in subsection (3B), for “police authority” substitute “ local policing body ”.Local Government, Planning and Land Act 1980140 The Local Government, Planning and Land Act 1980 is amended as follows.141 In section 99 (directions to dispose of land — supplementary), in subsection (4), for paragraphs (dc) and (dcc) substitute—“(dc)	a police and crime commissioner;(dcc)	the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime;”.142 In Schedule 16 (bodies to whom Part 10 applies), for paragraphs 5C and 5CC substitute—“5C	A police and crime commissioner.5CC	The Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime.”.Acquisition of Land Act 1981143 In the Acquisition of Land Act 1981, in section 17(4) (local authority and statutory undertakers' land), in paragraph (a) of the definition of “local authority”, omit “, a police authority established under section 3 of the Police Act 1996”.Animal Health Act 1981144 In the Animal Health Act 1981, in section 10A(1)(a) (annual review of import controls), omit “, police authorities”.62 
284	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 16 – Police reform: minor and consequential amendmentsDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)Finance Act 1981145 In the Finance Act 1981, in section 107 (sale of houses at discount by local authorities etc), in subsection (3)(k)—(a) for “police authority” substitute “ local policing body ”;(b) for “1996 or” substitute “ 1996, or a police authority within the meaning of ”.Aviation Security Act 1982146 The Aviation Security Act 1982 is amended as follows.147 In section 24AG (security executive groups), in subsection (2)(c), at the beginning insert “ in the case of an aerodrome in Scotland or Northern Ireland, ”.148 In section 24AT (interpretation), in subsection (6)(c), at the beginning insert “ in the case of an aerodrome in Scotland or Northern Ireland, ”.149 (1) Section 25B (police services agreements) is amended as follows.(2) In subsection (4)(b), at the beginning insert “ in the case of an aerodrome in Scotland or Northern Ireland, ”.(3) After subsection (4) insert—“(4A) Before entering into a police services agreement relating to an aerodrome in England or Wales, or a variation of such an agreement, the chief officer of police for the relevant police area must consult the local policing body for that area.”.
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 16 – Police reform: minor and consequential amendments Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)
285
150 In section 25E (discharge of functions of relevant persons in relation to police services agreements), in subsection (2)(c)—(a) after “incurred by” insert “ the local policing body (in the case of an aerodrome in England or Wales) or ”;(b) after “police authority” insert “ (in the case of an aerodrome in Scotland or Northern Ireland) ”.151 In section 26 (exercise of police functions at relevant aerodromes)—(a) for “police authority” (in each place) substitute “ local policing body or police authority ”;(b) in subsection (2C)(a), after “reimburse the” insert “ body or ”.152 In section 29 (control of road traffic at relevant aerodromes), in subsection (2)(a), for “police authority” substitute “ chief officer of police (in the case of an aerodrome in England or Wales) or the police authority (in any other case) ”.153 In section 29D (dispute resolution: powers), for “police authority” (in each place) substitute “ local policing body or police authority ”.154 (1) Section 31 (interpretation of Part 3 etc) is amended in accordance with this paragraph.(2) In subsection (1), in the definition of “relevant persons”, at the end insert “ , as read with subsection (1ZA) below ”.(3) After subsection (1) insert—“(1ZA) In relation to a dispute about payments to be made which is within section 29A(2)(d) and concerns an aerodrome in England or Wales, “relevant persons” includes the local policing body for the relevant police area.”.
286	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 16 – Police reform: minor and consequential amendmentsDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)Local Government (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1982155 The Local Government (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1982 is amended as follows.156 In section 33 (enforceability by local authorities of certain covenants relating to land), in subsection (9)(a), for the words from “police authority” to “Metropolitan Police Authority” substitute “ police and crime commissioner, the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime, ”.157 In section 41 (lost and uncollected property), in the definition of “local authority” in subsection (13), for paragraphs (ca) and (caa) substitute—“(ca)	a police and crime commissioner; and(caa)	the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime; and.”Stock Transfer Act 1982158 In the Stock Transfer Act 1982, in Schedule 1 (specified securities), in paragraph 7(1), for sub-paragraph (ba) substitute—“(ba)	any police and crime commissioner.”.County Courts Act 1984159 In the County Courts Act 1984, in section 60 (right of audience), in subsection (3), in the definition of “local authority” for the words from “a police authority” to “Metropolitan Police Authority” substitute “ a police and crime commissioner, the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime ”.62 
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 16 – Police reform: minor and consequential amendments Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)
287
Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984160 The Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 is amended as follows.161 In section 30 (arrest elsewhere than at a police station), in subsection (4)(b), for “police authority” substitute “ local policing body ”.162 In section 36 (custody officers at police stations), in subsection (9), for “police authority” substitute “ local policing body ”.163 (1) Section 67 (codes of practice: supplementary) is amended in accordance with this paragraph.(2) In subsection (4), for paragraph (a) substitute—“(a)	such persons as appear to the Secretary of State to represent the views of police and crime commissioners,(aa)	the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime, (ab)	the Common Council of the City of London,”.(3) In subsection (9A)(a), for “police authority employees” substitute “ civilian staff ”.Road Traffic Regulation Act 1984164 The Road Traffic Regulation Act 1984 is amended as follows.165 In section 26 (arrangements for patrolling school crossings), in subsection (5)—62 
288	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 16 – Police reform: minor and consequential amendmentsDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)(a) for “police authority” (in the first place) substitute “ chief officer of police of the police force maintained ”;(b) for “police authority” (in the second place) substitute “ chief officer ”.166 (1) Section 95 (appointment of traffic wardens) is amended in accordance with this paragraph.F233(2) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .(3) In subsection (4)—(a) for “A police authority” substitute “ A person ”;(b) after “subsection (1) above” insert “ (the “employer”) ”;(c) in paragraph (a), for “the police authority provide” substitute “ the employer provides ”;(d) in paragraph (b), for “the police authority” substitute “ the employer ”.(4) In subsection (6), for “police authority” substitute “ person ”.167 (1) Section 97 (supplementary provisions as to traffic wardens) is amended in accordance with this paragraph.(2) In subsection (1)—(a) for “the police authority” (in the first place) substitute “ their employer ”;(b) for “the police authority” (in the second place) substitute “ that employer ”.F234(3) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .(4) In subsection (5)—(a) after “Any power” insert “ of a person ”;(b) for “police authority” substitute “ person ”.(a) 
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 16 – Police reform: minor and consequential amendments Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)
289
Housing Act 1985168 In the Housing Act 1985, in section 4 (other descriptions of authority), in subsection (1)(e), for the words from “police authority” to “Police Act 1996” substitute “ police and crime commissioner ”.Housing Associations Act 1985169 In the Housing Associations Act 1985, in section 106 (minor definitions - general), in the definition of “local authority” in subsection (1), for the words from “and a police authority” to “Metropolitan Police Authority” substitute “ , a police and crime commissioner and the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime ”.Landlord and Tenant Act 1985170 In the Landlord and Tenant Act 1985, in section 38 (minor definitions), in the definition of local authority, for the words from “a police authority” to “Metropolitan Police Authority” substitute “ , a police and crime commissioner, the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime ”.Prosecution of Offences Act 1985171 In the Prosecution of Offences Act 1985, in section 3 (functions of the director), in subsection (3), in the definition of “police force”, for “police authority under the Police Act 1996” substitute “ local policing body ”.Local Government Act 1986172 The Local Government Act 1986 is amended as follows.62 
290	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 16 – Police reform: minor and consequential amendmentsDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)173 In section 6 (interpretation and application of Part 2), in subsection (2)(a), for the words from “a police authority” to “Metropolitan Police Authority” substitute—“a police and crime commissioner,the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime”.174 In section 9 (interpretation and application of Part 3), in subsection (1)(a), for the words from “a police authority” to “Metropolitan Police Authority” substitute—“a police and crime commissioner,the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime”.Channel Tunnel Act 1987175 (1) In the Channel Tunnel Act 1987, section 14 (arrangements for the policing of the tunnel system) is amended as follows.(2) In subsection (4)—(a) for “Kent Police Authority” substitute “ Police and Crime Commissioner for Kent ”;(b) for “that Authority” substitute “ that Commissioner ”.(3) In subsection (5)—(a) for “Kent Police Authority” substitute “ Police and Crime Commissioner for Kent ”;(b) for “the Authority” (in the first place) substitute “ the Commissioner ”.Landlord and Tenant Act 1987176 In the Landlord and Tenant Act 1987, in section 58 (exempt landlords and resident landlords), in subsection (1)(a), for the words from “police authority” to “1996” substitute “ a police and crime commissioner, the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime ”.62 
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 16 – Police reform: minor and consequential amendments Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)
291
Dartford-Thurrock Crossing Act 1988177 In section 19 of the Dartford-Thurrock Crossing Act 1988, in section 19 (exemption from tolls), for paragraph (a)(i) substitute—“(i) a local policing body;”.Housing Act 1988178 In the Housing Act 1988, in Schedule 1 (tenancies which cannot be assured tenancies), in paragraph 12(2) of Part 1 (local authority tenancies etc), for sub- paragraph (g) substitute—“(g)  a police and crime commissioner.”.Local Government Act 1988179 In the Local Government Act 1988, in Schedule 2 (public supply or works contracts: the public authorities), omit the words from “A police authority” to “Metropolitan Police Authority”.Local Government Finance Act 1988180 The Local Government Finance Act 1988 is amended as follows.181 In section 65A (Crown property), in subsection (4)(b), for the words from “police authority” to “1996” substitute “ police and crime commissioner ”.182 In section 74 (levies)—(a) in subsection (1)(c), omit “, combined police authority”;(a) 
292	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 16 – Police reform: minor and consequential amendmentsDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)(b) in subsection (4)(bb), for “Metropolitan Police Authority” substitute “ Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime ”.183 In section 84F (determination of grant)—(a) for “police authorities” (in each place) substitute “ police and crime commissioners ”;(b) omit subsection (7).184 In section 84Q (application of this Chapter etc)—(a) in subsection (2), for “police authorities” substitute “ police and crime commissioners ”;(b) omit subsection (3).185 In section 88B (special grants), in subsection (10), for the words from “police authority” to “1996” substitute “ police and crime commissioner ”.186 In section 111 (interpretation)—(a) in subsection (2), for paragraph (e) substitute— “(e)  a police and crime commissioner,(ea)  a chief officer of police (which, for this purpose, means a chief constable of a police force maintained under section 2 of the Police Act 1996 or the Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis),”;(b) in subsection (3), at the end insert “ and the 2011 Act is the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 ”.187 In section 112 (financial administration as to certain authorities), omit subsection (2)(a).62 
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 16 – Police reform: minor and consequential amendments Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)
293
188 (1) Section 114 (functions of responsible officer as respects reports) is amended in accordance with this paragraph.(2) In subsection (1), after “1999 Act” insert “ , or Schedule 1, 2 or 4 to the 2011 Act ”.(3) In subsection (2), for “a police force maintained by the authority” substitute “ the relevant police force ”.(4) In subsection (3A), after “relevant authority” insert “ (except where the relevant authority is a chief officer of police) ”.(5) For subsection (4)(b) substitute—“(b)  in the case of—(i) a police and crime commissioner, the commissioner and each member of the police and crime panel for the commissioner's police area;(ii) the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime, that Office and each member of the police and crime panel of the London Assembly;(iii) a chief officer of police, the chief officer and the elected local policing body; and(iv) any other relevant authority, each person who is at that time a member of the authority; and”.(6) After subsection (8) insert—“(8A) In this section “relevant police force”, in relation to the chief finance officer of a relevant authority, means—(a) in the case where the relevant authority is a chief officer of police, the police force of which that person is chief officer;(b) in any other case, the police force maintained by the relevant authority.”.189 (1) Section 115 (authority's duties as regards reports) is amended as follows.(2) After subsection (1A) insert—“(1B) In the case of a report made by the chief finance officer of an elected local policing body, that body must consider the report and decide whether the body agrees or disagrees with the views contained in the report and what action (if any) the body proposes to take in consequence of it.(1C) In the case of a report made by the chief finance officer of a chief officer of police, the chief officer of police must consider the report and decide whether the chief officer of police agrees or disagrees with the views contained in the
294	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 16 – Police reform: minor and consequential amendmentsDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)report and what action (if any) the chief officer of police proposes to take in consequence of it.(1D) The consideration and decision-making must be concluded not later than the end of the period of 21 days beginning with the day on which copies of the report are sent.(1E) As soon as practicable after the elected local policing body, or the chief officer of police, has concluded the consideration of the chief finance officer's report, that body or chief officer must prepare a report which specifies—(a) what action (if any) that body or chief officer has taken in response to the report;(b) what action (if any) that body or chief officer proposes to take in response to the report; and(c) the reasons for taking the action specified in the report or, as the case may be, for taking no action.(1F) As soon as practicable after the elected local policing body has prepared a report under subsection (1E), the elected local policing body must arrange for a copy of the report to be sent to—(a) the chief finance officer;(b) the person who at the time the report is made has the duty to audit the elected local policing body's accounts; and(c) each member of the police and crime panel for the police area for which the elected local policing body is established.(1G) As soon as practicable after the chief officer of police has prepared a report under subsection (1E), the chief officer of police must arrange for a copy of the report to be sent to—(a) the chief finance officer;(b) the person who at the time the report is made has the duty to audit the chief officer's accounts; and(c) the elected local policing body which maintains the police force in which the chief officer serves.”.(3) In subsection (2), at the beginning insert “ In the case of any authority other than an elected local policing body or a chief officer of police, ”.(4) In subsection (9), after “subsection” insert “ (1B), (1C) or ”.(5) In subsection (10), after “If subsection” insert “ (1B), (1C) ”.(6) In subsection (11), for “at the meeting” substitute “ under subsection (1B), (1C) or(2) ”.190 (1) Section 116 (information about meetings) is amended in accordance with this paragraph.(2) In the title, for “meetings” substitute “ consideration of reports etc ”.(2) 
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 16 – Police reform: minor and consequential amendments Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)
295
(3) After subsection (2A) insert—“(2B) In the case of an elected local policing body, the chief finance officer of that body must notify the body's auditor of any decisions taken by the body in accordance with section 115.(2C) In the case of a chief officer of police, the chief officer of police's chief finance officer must notify that chief officer of police's auditor of any decisions taken by the chief officer of police in accordance with section 115.”.191 In section 117 (rates and precepts: abolition), in subsection (5), omit “, combined police authority”.Road Traffic Act 1988192 The Road Traffic Act 1988 is amended as follows.193 In section 65A (motor cycles not to be sold without EC certificate of conformity), in subsection (5)(d), after “to a” insert “ local policing body or ”.194 (1) Section 67 (testing of condition of vehicles on roads) is amended in accordance with this paragraph.(2) In subsection (4)—(a) in paragraph (e), omit “and”;(b) after paragraph (e) insert—“(ea)  a person appointed by a chief officer of police in England or Wales (other than the Commissioner of Police for the City of London) to act, under the directions of that chief officer, for the purposes of this section, and”;(c) in paragraph (f), after “police area” insert “ in Scotland, or by the Common Council of the City of London, ”.(3) In subsection (5), after “(d)” insert “ , (ea) ”.(2) 
296	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 16 – Police reform: minor and consequential amendmentsDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)195 In section 78 (weighing of motor vehicles), in subsection (8)(b), after “by a” (in the second place), insert “ local policing body or a ”.196 In section 124 (exemption of police instructors from prohibition imposed by section 123), in subsection (2), in paragraph (b) of the definition of “police instructor”, for “a police authority” substitute “ a chief officer of police in England or Wales (other than the Commissioner of Police for the City of London), the Common Council of the City of London in its capacity as police authority, or a police authority ”.197 (1) Section 144 (exceptions from requirement of third-party insurance or security) is amended in accordance with this paragraph.(2) In subsection (2)(a), omit “(other than a police authority)”.(3) In subsection (2)(b)—(a) after “owned by” insert “ a local policing body or ”;(b) after “constable,” insert “ by a member of a police and crime commissioner's staff (within the meaning of Part 1 of the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011), by a member of the staff of the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime (within the meaning of that Part of that Act), by a member of the civilian staff of a police force (within the meaning of that Part of that Act), by a member of the civilian staff of the metropolitan police force (within the meaning of that Part of that Act), by a person employed by the Common Council of the City of London in its capacity as a police authority, ”.Road Traffic Offenders Act 1988198 (1) In the Road Traffic Offenders Act 1988, section 79 (statements by constables) is amended as follows.(2) In subsection (2), for “by the police authority” substitute “ as a civilian police employee ”.(3) After subsection (5), insert—(2) 
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 16 – Police reform: minor and consequential amendments Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)
297
“(5A) For the purposes of subsection (2), a person is employed as a civilian police employee for a police area if—(a) in the case of a police area listed in Schedule 1 to the Police Act 1996, the person is a member of the civilian staff of the police force (within the meaning of Part 1 of the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011) maintained for that area;(b) in the case of the metropolitan police district, the person is a member of the civilian staff of the metropolitan police force (within the meaning of that Part of that Act);(c) in the case of the City of London, the person is employed by the Common Council of the City of London in its capacity as police authority.”.Local Government and Housing Act 1989199 The Local Government and Housing Act 1989 is amended as follows.200 In section 1 (disqualification and political restriction of certain officers and staff), after subsection (8) insert—“(9) In this section a reference to a person holding a politically restricted post under a local authority includes a reference to every member of the staff of an elected local policing body, except for a deputy police and crime commissioner.”.201 (1) Section 4 (designation and reports of head of paid service) is amended in accordance with this paragraph.(2) After subsection (1) insert—“(1A) In the case of an elected local policing body, the body's chief executive is to be taken to have been designated as the head of the body's paid service (and, accordingly, subsection (1)(a) does not apply; but references to persons designated under this section include references to the body's chief executive).”.(3) In subsection (4), for “sent to” substitute “sent—(a) in the case of an elected local policing body, to the body and to the police and crime panel for the body's police area; and(a) 
298	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 16 – Police reform: minor and consequential amendmentsDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)(b) in any other case, to”.(4) In subsection (5), after “relevant authority” insert “ (other than an elected local policing body) ”.(5) After subsection (5) insert—“(5A) It shall be the duty of an elected local policing body to consider any report under this section by the head of the body's paid service, and to do so no later than three months after the body is sent a copy of the report.”.(6) In subsection (6)(a), after “below” insert “ and an elected local policing body ”.202 (1) Section 5 (designation and reports of monitoring officer) is amended in accordance with this paragraph.(2) In subsection (1), in the words after paragraph (b), omit the words from “(or,” to “authority” (in the last place).(3) After subsection (1B) insert—“(1C) In the case of an elected local policing body, the body's chief executive is to be taken to have been designated as the monitoring officer (and, accordingly, subsection (1)(a) does not apply; but references to persons designated under this section include references to the body's chief executive).”.(4) In subsection (3)(b), for “sent to” substitute “sent—(a) in the case of an elected local policing body, to the body and to the police and crime panel for the body's police area; and(b) in any other case, to”.(5) In subsection (5)(a), for “deputy at” substitute “deputy—(i) in the case of an elected local policing body, no later than three months after the body is sent a copy of the report; and(ii) in any other case, at”.(6) In subsection (8)—(a) in the definition of “chief finance officer”, after “1999” insert “ , Schedule 1 to the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 ”;(b) in paragraph (a) of the definition of “relevant authority”, after “below” insert “ and an elected local policing body ”.203 In section 7 (all staff to be appointed on merit), in subsection (1)—(a) in paragraph (a), omit “or”;(b) after paragraph (a) insert—“(aa)	an elected local policing body, or”.
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 16 – Police reform: minor and consequential amendments Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)
299
204 (1) Section 21 (interpretation of Part 1) is amended in accordance with this paragraph.(2) In subsection (1), omit paragraph (g).205 In section 67 (application of, and orders under, Part 5), in subsection (3), omit paragraph (i).206 (1) Section 155 (emergency financial assistance to local authorities) is amended as follows.(2) In subsection (1A), in paragraph (b) for “Metropolitan Police Authority” substitute “ Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime ”.(3) In subsection (4), for paragraph (ea) substitute— “(ea)	a police and crime commissioner;”.Aviation and Maritime Security Act 1990207 In the Aviation and Maritime Security Act 1990, in section 22(4)(b)(i) (power to require harbour authorities to promote searches in harbour areas), for “in England, Scotland or Wales by a police authority” substitute “ in England or Wales by a local policing body, in Scotland by a police authority, or in England, Wales or Scotland by ”.Town and Country Planning Act 1990208 The Town and Country Planning Act 1990 is amended as follows.62 
300	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 16 – Police reform: minor and consequential amendmentsDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)209 In section 252 (procedure for making orders), in subsection (12), in the definition of “local authority”, for the words from “police authority” to “Metropolitan Police Authority” substitute “ police and crime commissioner, the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime, ”.210 In section 336 (interpretation), in subsection (1), in the definition of “local authority”, in paragraph (a), for “Metropolitan Police Authority” substitute “ Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime ”.War Crimes Act 1991211 In the War Crimes Act 1991, in section 2 (expenses), in paragraph (a), for “Metropolitan Police Authority” substitute “ Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime ”.Local Government Finance Act 1992212 In the Local Government Finance Act 1992, in section 19 (exclusion of Crown exemption in certain cases), for subsection (3)(c) substitute—“(c)	a police and crime commissioner;”.Welsh Language Act 1993213 In the Welsh Language Act 1993, in section 6 (meaning of “public body”), for paragraph (d) substitute—“(d)	a police and crime commissioner;”.
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 16 – Police reform: minor and consequential amendments Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)
301
Deregulation and Contracting Out Act 1994214 The Deregulation and Contracting Out Act 1994 is amended as follows.215 In section 79A (meaning of “local authority” in England), omit paragraph (o).216 In section 79B (meaning of “local authority” in Wales), omit paragraph (g).Value Added Tax Act 1994217 In section 33 of the Value Added Tax Act 1994 (refunds of VAT in certain cases), in subsection (3)(f), at the beginning insert “ a police and crime commissioner, the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime and ”.Criminal Appeal Act 1995218 In the Criminal Appeal Act 1995, in section 22 (meaning of public body etc), in subsection (2)(a) and (b)(iii), for “police authority” substitute “ local policing body ”.Employment Rights Act 1996219 In the Employment Rights Act 1996, in section 50 (right to time off for public duties), omit subsection (2)(c).62 
302	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 16 – Police reform: minor and consequential amendmentsDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)Housing Grants, Construction and Regeneration Act 1996220 In the Housing Grants, Construction and Regeneration Act 1996, in section 3 (ineligible applicants) for subsection (2)(g) substitute—“(g)	a police and crime commissioner;”.Police Act 1997221 The Police Act 1997 is amended as follows.F235222	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .223 In section 119 (sources of information), in subsections (3) and (7), after “appropriate” insert “ local policing body or ”.224 In section 126 (interpretation of Part 5), in the definition of “police authority” in subsection (1), for “Great Britain” substitute “ Scotland ”.Police (Health and Safety) Act 1997225 In the Police (Health and Safety) Act 1997, in section 5 (payment of damages, compensation and fines out of certain funds), in subsection (3), in paragraph (a) of the definition of “the relevant authority”, for “police authority” substitute “ local policing body ”.223 
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 16 – Police reform: minor and consequential amendments Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)
303
Audit Commission Act 1998F236226	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .F236227	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .F236228	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .F236229	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .F236230	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
304	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 16 – Police reform: minor and consequential amendmentsDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)Crime and Disorder Act 1998231 The Crime and Disorder Act 1998 is amended as follows.232 In section 1A (power of Secretary of State to add relevant bodies), in subsection (1), for “ police authority ” substitute “local policing body”.233 In section 17 (duty to consider crime and disorder implications), in subsection (2), for “a police authority” substitute “ a local policing body ”.234 (1) In section 18 (interpretation of Chapter 1 of Part 1), subsection (1) is amended as follows.(2) After the definition of “local child curfew scheme” insert—““local policing body” has the meaning given by section 101(1) of the Police Act 1996;”.(3) Omit the definition of “police authority”.235 In section 38 (local provision of youth justice services), in subsection (2)(a), for “police authority” substitute “ local policing body ”.231 
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 16 – Police reform: minor and consequential amendments Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)
305
236 In section 41 (the Youth Justice Board), in subsection (10), for “police authority” substitute “ local policing body ”.237 In section 42 (supplementary provisions), in subsection (1), omit the definition of “police authority”.238 In section 115 (disclosure of information), in subsection (2)(c), for “police authority” substitute “ local policing body ”.Police (Northern Ireland) Act 1998239 In the Police (Northern Ireland) Act 1998, in Schedule 3 (the Police Ombudsman for Northern Ireland), in paragraph 8 (assistance by members of a police force in Great Britain), in sub-paragraph (2), after “to the” insert “ local policing body ”.Regional Development Agencies Act 1998240 In the Regional Development Agencies Act 1998, in section 7A (the London Development Agency Strategy), in subsection (5)(b) for “Metropolitan Police Authority” substitute “ Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime ”.Local Government Act 1999241 The Local Government Act 1999 is amended as follows.231 
306	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 16 – Police reform: minor and consequential amendmentsDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)242 (1) Section 1 (best value authorities) is amended in accordance with this paragraph.(2) In subsection (1), for paragraph (d) substitute—“(d)	the Common Council of the City of London in its capacity as a police authority;”.(3) Omit subsection (4).F237243	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .244 In section 10 (inspections), omit subsection (5).245 Omit section 10A (inspections: Auditor General for Wales).246 In section 23 (accounts), in subsection (4), omit paragraph (za).247 In section 29 (modifications for Wales), in subsection (1), omit the words from “except” to the end.244 
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 16 – Police reform: minor and consequential amendments Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)
307
Criminal Justice and Court Services Act 2000248 In the Criminal Justice and Court Services Act 2000, in section 71 (access to driver licensing records), in subsection (4), for paragraph (a) of the definition of “constables” substitute—“(a) persons appointed by a chief constable under paragraph 4 of Schedule 2 to the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (civilian staff of police forces outside London),(aa) persons appointed by the Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis under paragraph 1 of Schedule 4 to that Act (civilian staff of metropolitan police force),”.Freedom of Information Act 2000249 In Schedule 1 to the Freedom of Information Act 2000 (public authorities), in Part 5, for paragraphs 57 and 58 substitute—“57	A police and crime commissioner.58	The Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime.”.Learning and Skills Act 2000250 The Learning and Skills Act 2000 is amended as follows.251 In section 125 (consultation and co-ordination), for subsection (1)(c) substitute— “(c)	a police and crime commissioner,”.252 In section 129 (supplementary), in subsection (1), omit the definition of “police authority”.244 
308	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 16 – Police reform: minor and consequential amendmentsDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)Local Government Act 2000253 The Local Government Act 2000 is amended as follows.254 In section 21C (reports and recommendations of overview and scrutiny committees: duties of certain partner authorities), in subsection (8), in the definition of “relevant partner authority”, for paragraph (a) substitute—“(a)  a local policing body, or”.255 In section 21E (overview and scrutiny committees of certain district councils: functions with respect to partner authorities), in subsection (4), for paragraph (a) (ii)(a) substitute—“(a) a local policing body, or”.256 In section 22A (overview and scrutiny committees of certain authorities in England: provision of information etc by certain partner authorities), in subsection (6), in the definition of “associated authority”, for paragraph (b)(i) substitute—“(i) a local policing body, or”.257 (1) Section 49 (principles governing conduct of members of relevant authorities) is amended in accordance with this paragraph.(2) In subsection (1), omit “and police authorities in Wales”.(3) In subsection (2), omit “(other than police authorities)”.(4) Omit subsection (4).(5) In subsection (6), omit paragraphs (h) and (m).258 (1) Section 50 (model codes of conduct) is amended in accordance with this paragraph.244 
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 16 – Police reform: minor and consequential amendments Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)(2) In subsection (1), omit “and police authorities in Wales”.(3) In subsection (2), omit “other than police authorities”.
309
259 (1) Section 51 (duty of relevant authorities to adopt codes of conduct) is amended in accordance with this paragraph.(2) In subsection (4A), omit “or police authority in Wales”.(3) In subsection (4C), omit “other than a police authority”.(4) In subsection (6)(c)(i), omit “or a police authority in Wales”.260 (1) Section 53 (standards committees) is amended in accordance with this paragraph.(2) In subsections (3) and (4), omit “or a police authority in Wales”.(3) In subsections (6)(a) and (7)(a), omit “and police authorities in Wales”.(4) In subsection (8), omit “or a police authority in Wales”.(5) In subsection (9), omit “and a police authority in Wales”.(6) In subsection (10), omit “or a police authority in Wales”.(7) In subsection (11)—(a) in paragraph (a), omit “other than police authorities”;(b) in paragraph (k), omit “(other than police authorities)”.261 (1) Section 54 (functions of standards committees) is amended in accordance with this paragraph.(2) In subsection (4), omit “and police authorities in Wales”.(3) In subsection (5), omit “(other than police authorities)”.(4) In subsection (6), omit “and police authorities in Wales”.(5) In subsection (7), omit “(other than police authorities)”.(2) 
310	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 16 – Police reform: minor and consequential amendmentsDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)262 (1) Section 54A (sub-committees of standards committees) is amended in accordance with this paragraph.(2) In subsection (4), omit “or of a police authority in Wales”.(3) In subsection (5), omit “other than a police authority”.263 In section 57 (Standards Board for England), in subsection (5)(b) and (c), omit “and police authorities in Wales”.264 In section 68 (Public Services Ombudsman for Wales), in subsection (2)(a) and (b), omit “(other than police authorities)”.265 In section 73 (matters referred to monitoring officers), omit subsection (6).266 (1) Section 81 (disclosure and registration of members' interests etc) is amended in accordance with this paragraph.(2) In subsection (7)(b), omit “or a police authority in Wales”.(3) In subsection (8), omit “(other than police authorities)”.267 (1) Section 82 (code of conduct for local government employees) is amended in accordance with this paragraph.(2) In subsection (1), omit “and police authorities in Wales”.(3) In subsection (2), omit “(other than police authorities)”.(2) 
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 16 – Police reform: minor and consequential amendments Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)
311
268 In section 83 (interpretation of Part 3), in subsection (1), omit the definition of “police authority”.269 (1) Section 101 (indemnification of members and officers of relevant authorities) is amended in accordance with this paragraph.(2) In subsection (1), omit “and police authorities in Wales”.(3) In subsection (2), omit “(other than police authorities)”.(4) In subsection (5), for “ “police authority” and “relevant authority” have” substitute “ “relevant authority” has”.Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001270 The Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is amended as follows.271 In section 97 (regulations for police forces)—(a) in subsection (3)(a), for “police authorities” substitute “ local policing bodies ”;(b) for subsection (4)(c), substitute—“(c)	such persons as appear to the Secretary of State to represent the views of police and crime commissioners;(ca)	the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime;(cb)	the Common Council of the City of London; and”.272 In section 98 (directions after inspection identifies training needs), in subsections(1) and (2) for “police authority” substitute “ local policing body ”.
312	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 16 – Police reform: minor and consequential amendmentsDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)Private Security Industry Act 2001273 (1) In the Private Security Industry Act 2001, Schedule 2 (activities liable to control under the Act) is amended as follows.(2) In paragraph 2 (manned guarding), in sub-paragraph (7)—(a) in sub-paragraph (f)—(i) for “person employed by a police authority” substitute “ relevant employee ”;(ii) for “police authority employees” substitute “ civilian staff ”;(b) in sub-paragraph (i), for “police authority employees” substitute “ civilian staff ”.(3) In paragraph 3 (immobilisation of vehicles), in sub-paragraph (3A)(c), for “police authority employees” substitute “ civilian staff ”.(4) In paragraph 3A (restriction and removal of vehicles), in sub-paragraph (6)—(a) in sub-paragraph (c), for “police authority” substitute “ local policing body ”;(b) in sub-paragraph (e), for “police authority employees” substitute “ civilian staff ”.Vehicles (Crime) Act 2001274 The Vehicles (Crime) Act 2001 is amended as follows.275 In section 18 (register of registration plate suppliers), in subsection (9), for paragraph (a) substitute—“(a) members of the civilian staff of a police force, including the metropolitan police force, (within the meaning of Part 1 of the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011),(aa) persons employed by the Common Council of the City of London who are under the direction and control of the Commissioner of Police for the City of London,”.276 In section 38 (unified power for Secretary of State to fund speed cameras etc), in subsection (5)(b), for the words from “any police authority” to “Metropolitan Police Authority” substitute “ any police and crime commissioner, the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime ”.244 
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 16 – Police reform: minor and consequential amendments Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)
313
Police Reform Act 2002277 The Police Reform Act 2002 is amended as follows.278 (1) Section 10 (general functions of the Commission) is amended in accordance with this paragraph.(2) In subsection (1), in paragraphs (a) and (f), for “police authorities” substitute “ local policing bodies ”.(3) In subsection (3)(d), for “police authority” substitute “ local policing body ”.279 In section 11 (reports to the Secretary of State), in subsections (6)(a), (7)(a), (9) and (10)(b), for “police authority” substitute “ local policing body ”.280 In section 12 (complaints, matters and persons to which Part 2 applies), in subsection (7)—(a) after paragraph (a) insert—“(aa)	he is a civilian employee of a police force;”;(b) in paragraph (b), for “a police authority” substitute “ the Common Council of the City of London ”.281 (1) Section 15 (general duties of police authorities, chief constables and inspectors) is amended in accordance with this paragraph.(2) In the title, for “police authorities” substitute “ local policing bodies ”.(3) In subsections (1)(a) and (3)(a), for “police authority” substitute “ local policing body ”.(4) In subsection (3)(c), for “police authority” substitute “ local policing body ”.(2) 
314	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 16 – Police reform: minor and consequential amendmentsDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)(5) In subsections (4)(a), (5)(a), (6) and (8A), for “police authority” substitute “ local policing body ”.282 (1) Section 16 (payment for assistance with investigations) is amended in accordance with this paragraph.(2) In subsection (3)—(a) for “police authority” (in each place) substitute “ local policing body ”;(b) in paragraph (b)(i), for “police authorities” substitute “ local policing bodies ”.(3) In subsection (4)—(a) for “police authority” substitute “ local policing body ”;(b) in paragraph (a), for “that authority” substitute “ that body ”;(c) in paragraph (b)(i), for “police authorities” substitute “ local policing bodies ”.(4) In subsection (5), for “police authority” substitute “ local policing body ”.(5) In subsection (6), for “police authorities” (in each place) substitute “ local policing bodies ”.283 (1) Section 16A (police investigations: National Police Improvement Agency involvement) is amended in accordance with this paragraph.(2) In subsection (1), for “police authority” substitute “ local policing body ”.(3) In subsection (7)—(a) for “police authority” substitute “ local policing body ”;(b) in paragraph (b)(i), for “police authorities” substitute “ local policing bodies ”.284 In section 17 (provision of information to the Commission)—(a) in subsection (1)(a), for “police authority” substitute “ local policing body ”;(b) in subsection (2)—(i) for “police authority” substitute “ local policing body ”;(ii) in paragraph (a), for “that authority” substitute “ that body ”;(c) in subsection (4)—(a) 
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 16 – Police reform: minor and consequential amendments Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)
315
(i) for “police authority” substitute “ local policing body ”;(ii) in paragraphs (a) and (b), for “that authority” substitute “ that body ”;(d) in subsection (6), for “police authority” substitute “ local policing body ”.285 In section 18 (inspections of police premises on behalf of Commission)—(a) in subsection (1)—(i) for “the authority” substitute “ the body ”;(ii) in paragraph (a), for “police authority” substitute “ local policing body ”;(b) in subsection (3), for “the authority” substitute “ the body ”;(c) in subsection (5)(b), for “police authorities” substitute “ local policing bodies ”.286 In section 20 (duty to keep the complainant informed), in subsection (8), for “police authority” substitute “ local policing body ”.287 (1) Section 22 (power of Commission to issue guidance) is amended as follows.(2) In subsection (1)(a), for “police authorities” substitute “ local policing bodies ”.(3) In subsection (3), for paragraph (a) substitute—“(a)	such persons as appear to the Commission to represent the views of police and crime commissioners;(aa)	the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime; (ab)	the Common Council;”.288 In section 23 (regulations), in subsection (2)(n), for “police authorities” substitute “ local policing bodies ”.
316	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 16 – Police reform: minor and consequential amendmentsDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)289 In section 24 (consultation on regulations), for paragraph (b) substitute—“(b)	such persons as appear to the Secretary of State to represent the views of police and crime commissioners;(ba)	the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime; (bb)	the Common Council;”.290 (1) Section 26 (forces maintained otherwise than by police authorities) is amended in accordance with this paragraph.(2) In the title, for “police authorities” substitute “ local policing bodies ”.(3) In subsections (1)(b) and (2), for “police authority” substitute “ local policing body ”.291 In section 29 (interpretation of Part 2), in subsection (1)—(a) in the definition of “appropriate authority”—(i) in paragraph (a)(i), for “a senior officer, the police authority” substitute “ the chief officer or an acting chief officer, the local policing body ”;(ii) in paragraph (a)(ii), for “a senior officer” substitute “ the chief officer or an acting chief officer ”;(iii) in paragraph (b)(i), for “a senior officer, the police authority” substitute “ the chief officer or an acting chief officer, the local policing body ”;(iv) in paragraph (b)(ii), for “a senior officer” substitute “ the chief officer or an acting chief officer ”;(v) after paragraph (b)(ii) insert— “ and, for the purposes of this definition, “acting chief officer” means a person exercising or performing functions of a chief constable in accordance with section 41 of the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011; a person exercising powers or duties of the Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis in accordance with section 44 or 45(4) of that Act; or a person exercising duties of the Commissioner of Police for the City of London in accordance with section 25 of the City of London Police Act 1839; ”;(b) in the definition of “relevant force”, for paragraph (a) substitute—“(a) if that authority is a local policing body, the police force which the body is responsible for maintaining; and”;(c) omit the definition of “senior officer”.(a) 
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 16 – Police reform: minor and consequential amendments Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)
317
292 (1) Section 38 (police powers for police authority employees) is amended in accordance with this paragraph.(2) In the title, for “police authority employees” substitute “civilian staff”.F238(3) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .(4) In subsection (7), for “An employee of a police authority” substitute “A relevant employee”.(5) After subsection (9) insert—“(11) In this section “relevant employee” means—(a) in the case of—(i) a police force maintained for a police area in accordance with section 2 of the Police Act 1996, or(ii) the police force maintained for the metropolitan police district in accordance with section 5A of that Act,a member of the civilian staff of that police force (within the meaning of Part 1 of the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011);(b) in the case of any other police force, a person who—(i) is employed by the police authority maintaining that force, and(ii) is under the direction and control of the chief officer making a designation under subsection (1).”.F239293	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
318	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 16 – Police reform: minor and consequential amendmentsDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)294 (1) Section 39 (police powers for contracted out staff) is amended in accordance with this paragraph.(2) In subsections (1) and (2), for “police authority” substitute “ local policing body ”.(3) In subsection (11), for paragraph (a) substitute—“(a)	such persons as appear to the Secretary of State to represent the views of police and crime commissioners;(aa)	the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime;(ab)	the Common Council of the City of London; and”.(4) In subsection (13)(b), for “police authority” substitute “ local policing body ”.295 (1) Section 40 (community safety accreditation schemes) is amended in accordance with this paragraph.(2) In subsection (4)(a), for “police authority” substitute “ local policing body ”.(3) In subsection (5), for paragraph (a) substitute—“(a)	the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime;”.(4) In subsection (7)—(a) for “police plan under section 8 of the 1996 Act” substitute “ police and crime plan under section 5 or 6 of the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 ”;(b) omit the words from “and every draft” to “this section,” (in the second place);(c) for “police authority” (in each place) substitute “ local policing body ”.296 In	section	42	(supplementary	provisions	relating	to	designations	and accreditations), in subsection (7)—(a) for “police authority” (in each place) substitute “ chief officer of police or local policing body ”;(b) for “that authority” substitute “ that chief officer or body ”.297 In section 43 (railway safety accreditation scheme), in subsection (9), for paragraph (c) substitute—“(c)	such persons as appear to the Secretary of State to represent the views of police and crime commissioners;(ca)	the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime;(cb)	the Common Council of the City of London; and”.
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 16 – Police reform: minor and consequential amendments Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)
319
F240298	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .299 (1) Section 51 (independent custody visitors for places of detention) is amended in accordance with this paragraph.(2) In subsection (1), for “police authority” substitute “ local policing body ”.(3) In subsection (1A) (inserted by section 117 of the Coroners and Justice Act 2009), for “police authority” substitute “ local policing body ”.(4) In subsection (2)—(a) in paragraph (a), for “police authority” substitute “ local policing body ”;(b) in paragraph (b), for “that authority” substitute “ that body ”.(5) In subsection (3), for “police authority” substitute “ local policing body ”.(6) In subsection (6), for “police authorities” substitute “ local policing bodies ”.(7) In subsection (7), for paragraph (a) substitute—“(a)	such persons as appear to the Secretary of State to represent the views of police and crime commissioners;(aa)	the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime; (ab)	the Common Council of the City of London;”.(8) In subsection (9), for “Police authorities” substitute “ local policing bodies ”.(9) In subsection (10)—(a) before its substitution by virtue of section 117 of the Coroners and Justice Act 2009, for “police authority” substitute “ local policing body ”;(b) as substituted by virtue of section 117 of the Coroners and Justice Act 2009, for “police authority” substitute “ local policing body ”.300 (1) In Schedule 3 (handling of complaints and conduct matters etc), Part 1 (handling of complaints) is amended in accordance with this paragraph.(2) In paragraph 1—(a) in sub-paragraphs (1), (2)(b) and (5), for “police authority” substitute “ local policing body ”;(b) in sub-paragraph (6), for “police authority” substitute “ local policing body ”.(a) 
320	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 16 – Police reform: minor and consequential amendmentsDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)(3) In paragraph 2—(a) in sub-paragraphs (2) and (5), for “police authority” substitute “ local policing body ”;(b) in sub-paragraph (6)(a)—(i) for “police authority” substitute “ local policing body ”;(ii) for “the authority” substitute “ the body ”;(c) in sub-paragraph (6)(c), for “police authority” substitute “ local policing body ”;(d) in sub-paragraph (6), in the words after sub-paragraph (c), for “the authority” substitute “ the body ”.F241(4) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .(5) In paragraph 4—(a) in sub-paragraph (3)—(i) for “police authority” (in each place) substitute “ local policing body ”;(ii) in sub-paragraph (a), for “that authority” substitute “ that body ”;(b) in sub-paragraph (5)(b), for “police authority” substitute “ local policing body ”;(c) in sub-paragraph (6)—(i) for “police authority” substitute “ local policing body ”;(ii) in sub-paragraph (b), for “that authority” substitute “ that body ”.(6) In paragraph 5(1), for “police authority” substitute “ local policing body ”.301 (1) In Schedule 3 (handling of complaints and conduct matters etc), Part 2 (handling of conduct matters) is amended in accordance with this paragraph.(2) In paragraph 10—(a) in sub-paragraph (1)—(i) in sub-paragraph (a) for “police authority” (in each place) substitute “ local policing body ”;(ii) in sub-paragraphs (a) and (b), for “that authority” substitute “ that body ”;(b) in sub-paragraph (2), for “the authority” substitute “ the body ”;(c) in sub-paragraph (3), for “police authority” substitute “ local policing body ”.(3) In paragraph 11(1)(a), for “police authority” substitute “ local policing body ”.(4) In paragraph 12—(2) 
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 16 – Police reform: minor and consequential amendments Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)
321
(a) in sub-paragraph (1)—(i) for “police authority” substitute “ local policing body ”;(ii) for “that authority” substitute “ that body ”;(b) in sub-paragraph (5), for “police authority” substitute “ local policing body ”;(c) in sub-paragraph (6), for “police authority” substitute “ local policing body ”.(5) In paragraph 13—(a) in sub-paragraph (1)—(i) for “police authority” substitute “ local policing body ”;(ii) for “the authority” substitute “ the body ”;(b) in sub-paragraph (3)—(i) for “police authority” substitute “ local policing body ”;(ii) in sub-paragraph (b), for “police authority” substitute “ local policing body ”;(c) in sub-paragraph (5)(b), for “police authority” substitute “ local policing body ”;(d) in sub-paragraph (6)—(i) for “police authority” substitute “ local policing body ”;(ii) for “that authority” (in each place) substitute “ that body ”.(6) In paragraph 14(1), for “police authority” substitute “ local policing body ”.302 (1) In Schedule 3 (handling of complaints and conduct matters etc), Part 2A (handling of death and serious injury matters) is amended in accordance with this paragraph.(2) In paragraph 14A(1), for “police authority” substitute “ local policing body ”.(3) In paragraph 14B—(a) in sub-paragraph (1)—(i) for “police authority” substitute “ local policing body ”;(ii) for “that authority” (in each place) substitute “ that body ”;(b) in sub-paragraph (5), for “police authority” substitute “ local policing body ”;(c) in sub-paragraph (6), for “police authority” substitute “ local policing body ”.(4) In paragraph 14D(1), for “police authority” substitute “ local policing body ”.F242303	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
322	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 16 – Police reform: minor and consequential amendmentsDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)Proceeds of Crime Act 2002304 The Proceeds of Crime Act 2002 is amended as follows.305 In section 55 (sums received by designated officer), in subsection (8)—(a) after paragraph (a) insert—“(aa) a member of a police and crime commissioner's staff (within the meaning of Part 1 of the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011),(ab) a member of the staff of the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime (within the meaning of that Part of that Act),(ac) a member of the civilian staff of a police force, including the metropolitan police force, (within the meaning of that Part of that Act),”;(b) in paragraph (b), omit the words from “a person” to “or”.306 In section 302 (compensation), in subsection (7A)(a), for sub-paragraph (i) substitute—“(i) who was a member of the civilian staff of a police force, including the metropolitan police force, (within the meaning of that Part of that Act), or”.Anti-social Behaviour Act 2003F243307	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 16 – Police reform: minor and consequential amendments Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)
323
F243308	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .F243309	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Courts Act 2003310 The Courts Act 2003 is amended as follows.311 In section 8 (local justice areas), in subsection (7), for paragraph (c) substitute— “(c)	a police and crime commissioner or the Mayor's Office for Policingand Crime.”.312 In section 41 (disqualification of lay justices who are members of local authorities), in subsection (6)(c), for the words from “a police authority” to “Metropolitan Police Authority” substitute “ a police and crime commissioner, the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime ”.310 
324	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 16 – Police reform: minor and consequential amendmentsDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)Criminal Justice Act 2003313 In the Criminal Justice Act 2003, in section 221 (provision of attendance centres), in subsection (3)—(a) for “police authority” substitute “ local policing body ”;(b) for “that authority” substitute “ that authority or body ”.Finance Act 2003314 In the Finance Act 2003, in Schedule 9 (stamp duty land tax: right to buy, shared ownership leases etc), for “police authority” (in the first place) substitute “ local policing body ”.Licensing Act 2003315 In the Licensing Act 2003, in section 170 (exemption of police from liability for damages), in subsection (4A)—(a) after “such a person” insert “ exercising such powers by virtue of such a designation by the Commissioner of Police of the City of London ”;(b) for “a police authority” substitute “ the Common Council of the City of London ”.Local Government Act 2003316 The Local Government Act 2003 is amended as follows.317 In section 23 (meaning of “local authority”), in subsection (1), for paragraph (n) substitute—“(n)	a police and crime commissioner;”.
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 16 – Police reform: minor and consequential amendments Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)
325
318 In section 25 (budget calculations: report on robustness of estimates etc), in subsection (3)—(a) in paragraph (d), omit “or”;(b) at the end of paragraph (e), insert “or(f)	Schedule 1, 2 or 4 to the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011”.319 In section 33 (interpretation of Chapter 1), in subsection (1), for paragraph (m) substitute—“(m)	a police and crime commissioner.”.320 In section 95 (power to trade in function-related activities through a company), in subsection (7)—(a) omit the definition of “police authority”;(b) in the definition of “relevant authority”, for “a police authority or” substitute “ the Common Council of the City of London in its capacity as a police authority and ”.321 In section 101 (staff transfer matters: general), omit subsection (7).Railways and Transport Safety Act 2003322 The Railways and Transport Safety Act 2003 is amended as follows.323 In section 25 (special constables), in subsection (5)(d), for “police authority” substitute “ local policing body ”.310 
326	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 16 – Police reform: minor and consequential amendmentsDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)324 In section 28 (exercise of powers by civilians), in subsection (1)(a), for “police authority employees” substitute “ civilian staff ”.325 In section 45 (regulation of procedure and practice), omit subsection (2)(a).326 In section 50 (policing objectives: Authority), in subsection (3)—(a) in paragraph (a), at the end insert “ and ”;(b) omit paragraph (c) (and the word “and” at the end of paragraph (b)).327 In section 55 (three-year strategy plan)—(a) in paragraph (b), at the end insert “ and ”;(b) omit paragraph (d) (and the word “and” at the end of paragraph (c)).328 In Schedule 4 (British Transport Police Authority), in paragraph 7 (disqualification), for sub-paragraph (2)(c) substitute—“(c) a member of a police and crime commissioner's staff (within the meaning of Part 1 of the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011),(ca) a member of the staff of the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime (within the meaning of that Part of that Act),(cb) a member of the civilian staff of a police force, including the metropolitan police force, (within the meaning of that Part of that Act), or”.
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 16 – Police reform: minor and consequential amendments Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)
327
Sexual Offences Act 2003329 In the Sexual Offences Act 2003, in section 136M (reimbursement of costs), for “police authority” (in each place) substitute “ local policing body ”.Children Act 2004330 The Children Act 2004 is amended as follows.331 In section 10 (co-operation to improve well-being: England), in subsection (4)(b), for “the police authority” substitute “ the local policing body ”.332 In section 11 (arrangements to safeguard and promote welfare: England), in subsection (1)(h), for “police authority” substitute “ local policing body ”.333 In section 25 (co-operation to improve well-being: Wales), in subsection (4)(a), for “the police authority” substitute “ the local policing body ”.334 In section 28 (arrangements to safeguard and promote welfare: Wales), in subsection (1)(d), for “police authority” substitute “ local policing body ”.Housing Act 2004335 In the Housing Act 2004, in Schedule 14 (buildings which are not HMOs), in paragraph 2(1) (buildings controlled or managed by public sector bodies etc), for sub-paragraphs (c) and (d) substitute—310 
328	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 16 – Police reform: minor and consequential amendmentsDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)“(c)	a police and crime commissioner,(d)	the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime,”.Public Audit (Wales) Act 2004336 The Public Audit (Wales) Act 2004 is amended as follows.337 In section 12 (local government bodies in Wales), in subsection (1)—(a) in paragraph (f), for “police authority” substitute “ police and crime commissioner ”;(b) after paragraph (f), insert—“(fa) a chief constable of a police force maintained under section 2 of the Police Act 1996 for a police area in Wales;”.338 (1) Section 40 (documents relating to police authorities) is amended in accordance with this paragraph.(2) In the title, for “police authorities” substitute “ police and crime commissioners and chief constables ”.(3) In subsection (1), for “police authority for” substitute “ police and crime commissioner for, or the chief constable of a police force maintained under section 2 of the Police Act 1996 for, ”.(4) In subsection (2)—(a) for “police authorities” substitute “ police and crime commissioners ”;(b) for “police authority” substitute “ police and crime commissioner ”.(5) After subsection (2) insert—“(3) If the Auditor General for Wales has sent a document (or a copy of a document) relating to one or more chief constables of police forces maintained under section 2 of the Police Act 1996 for a police area in Wales, the Auditor General may send a copy of the document to the persons to whom a copy of a document may be sent under subsection (2).”.
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 16 – Police reform: minor and consequential amendments Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)
329
339 In section 46 (performance standards: relevant bodies), in subsection (1)(d), for “police authority” substitute “ police and crime commissioner ”.Drugs Act 2005340 In the Drugs Act 2005, in section 19 (interpretation), for subsection (7) substitute—“(7) Police support officer” means—(a) persons appointed by a chief constable under paragraph 4 of Schedule 2 to the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (civilian staff of police forces outside London), and(b) persons appointed by the Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis under paragraph 1 of Schedule 4 to that Act (civilian staff of metropolitan police force).”.Public Services Ombudsman (Wales) Act 2005341 The Public Services Ombudsman (Wales) Act 2005 is amended as follows.342 In Schedule 2 (excluded matters), in paragraph 1, for “police authority” substitute “ police and crime commissioner ”.343 In Schedule 3 (listed authorities), for “police authority” substitute “ police and crime commissioner ”.310 
330	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 16 – Police reform: minor and consequential amendmentsDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005344 The Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 is amended as follows.345 (1) Section 6 (annual plans) is amended in accordance with this paragraph.(2) In subsection (7)(d)—(a) at the beginning insert “ each local policing body for an area in England and Wales, ”;(b) for “Great Britain” substitute “ Scotland ”.(3) In subsection (8), for “Great Britain” substitute “ Scotland ”.346 (1) Section 7 (annual reports) is amended in accordance with this paragraph.(2) In subsection (4)(d)—(a) at the beginning insert “ each local policing body for an area in England and Wales, ”;(b) for “Great Britain” substitute “ Scotland ”.(3) In subsection (5), for “Great Britain” substitute “ Scotland ”.347 (1) Section 23 (mutual assistance between SOCA and law enforcement agencies: voluntary arrangements) is amended in accordance with this paragraph.(2) In subsections (8) and (9), for “relevant police authority” substitute “ relevant policing body ”.(3) In subsection (11), in the definition of “relevant police authority”—(a) for “relevant police authority” substitute “ relevant policing body ”;(b) before paragraph (a) insert—“(za) in relation to a police force in England or Wales, the local policing body maintaining that force,”;(c) in paragraph (a), for “Great Britain” substitute “ Scotland ”.(a) 
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 16 – Police reform: minor and consequential amendments Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)
331
348 (1) Section 26 (use by SOCA of police premises etc) is amended in accordance with this paragraph.(2) In subsection (1)(a), for “relevant police authority” substitute “ relevant policing body ”.(3) In subsection (2)—(a) in paragraph (a), for “relevant police authority” substitute “ relevant policing body ”;(b) for “that authority” substitute “ that body ”.(4) In subsection (3)—(a) for “relevant police authority” substitute “ relevant policing body ”;(b) in paragraphs (a) and (b), for “that body” substitute “ SOCA or that body ”.(5) In subsection (6)—(a) for “relevant police authority” substitute “ relevant policing body ”;(b) for “that authority” substitute “ that body ”.(6) In subsection (7)—(a) for “relevant police authority” substitute “ relevant policing body ”;(b) for “the police authority” substitute “ the local policing body ”.349 (1) Section 155 (payments by Secretary of State to police authorities in relation to the prevention, detection and enforcement of certain traffic offences) is amended in accordance with this paragraph.(2) In the title, for “police authority” substitute “ local policing body ”.(3) In subsection (1), for “police authority” substitute “ local policing body ”.350 In Schedule 5 (persons specified for the purposes of section 82), in paragraph 14(a), for “police authority employees” substitute “ civilian staff ”.Government of Wales Act 2006351 The Government of Wales Act 2006 is amended as follows.310 
332	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 16 – Police reform: minor and consequential amendmentsDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)352 In section 72 (partnership council), in subsection (5)(c), for “police authorities” substitute “ police and crime commissioners ”.F244353	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .London Olympic Games and Paralympic Games Act 2006354 The London Olympic Games and Paralympic Games Act 2006 is amended as follows.355 In section 21 (offence), in subsection (4), after “pay to” insert “ a local policing body, ”.356 In section 22 (enforcement of power of entry)—(a) in subsection (8), after “compensation from” insert “ a local policing body, ”;(b) in subsection (9), after “A” (at the beginning) insert “ local policing body, a ”.357 In section 28 (enforcement of power of entry)—(a) in subsection (6), after “compensation from” insert “ a local policing body, ”;(b) in subsection (7), after “A” (at the beginning) insert “ local policing body, a ”.(a) 
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 16 – Police reform: minor and consequential amendments Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)
333
Police and Justice Act 2006358 The Police and Justice Act 2006 is amended as follows.359 In section 6 (consultation with APA and ACPO), omit subsection (2)(a).360 (1) Schedule 1 (National Policing Improvement Agency) is amended as follows.(2) In paragraph 5 (annual plans)—(a) in sub-paragraph (6)(b), for “police authority” substitute “ local policing body ”;(b) in sub-paragraph (7), for paragraph (b) substitute—“(b)	such persons as appear to the Secretary of State to represent the views of police and crime commissioners,(ba)	the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime, (bb)	the Common Council of the City of London,”.(3) In paragraph 6 (strategic priorities), for sub-paragraph (2)(c) (and the word “and” at the end of sub-paragraph (2)(b)) substitute—“(b)	such persons as appear to the Secretary of State to represent the views of police and crime commissioners,(c) the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime, and(d) the Common Council of the City of London.”.(4) In paragraph 7 (chairman and other members)—(a) for sub-paragraph (2)(a) substitute—“(a)	such persons as appear to the Secretary of State to represent the views of police and crime commissioners,(ab)	the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime,(ac)	the Common Council of the City of London, and”;(b) in sub-paragraph (4)(a), for “nominated by the Association of Police Authorities” substitute “ who is a police and crime commissioner ”.(5) In paragraph 28 (annual reports), in sub-paragraph (4)(b), for “police authority” substitute “ local policing body ”.(6) In the italic heading before paragraph 35 (Payments by Agency to police authorities), after “to” insert “ local policing bodies ”.(2) 
334	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 16 – Police reform: minor and consequential amendmentsDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)(7) In paragraph 35, in sub-paragraph (a), for “police authorities” substitute “ local policing bodies ”.(8) In paragraph 48 (power to modify objects, functions and strategy of the Agency), in sub-paragraph (10), for sub-paragraph (b) substitute—“(b)	such persons as appear to the Secretary of State to represent the views of police and crime commissioners,(c) the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime,(d) the Common Council of the City of London, and”.Safeguarding Vulnerable Groups Act 2006361 In the Safeguarding Vulnerable Groups Act 2006, in Schedule 3 (barred lists), in paragraph 19 (information), in sub-paragraph (4), for “police authority” substitute “ local policing body ”.Violent Crime Reduction Act 2006362 The Violent Crime Reduction Act 2006 is amended as follows.363 In section 18 (functions of local chief officer of police), for “police authority” (in each place), substitute “ local policing body ”.364 In section 19 (guidance about the designation of zones)—(a) for “police authorities” (in each place) substitute “ local policing bodies ”;(b) for “police authority” substitute “ local policing body ”.(a) 
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 16 – Police reform: minor and consequential amendments Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)
335
Corporate Manslaughter and Corporate Homicide Act 2007365 In the Corporate Manslaughter and Corporate Homicide Act 2007, in section 13 (application to police forces), in subsection (3)(b), for “police authority” substitute “ local policing body ”.Local Government and Public Involvement in Health Act 2007366 The Local Government and Public Involvement in Health Act 2007 is amended as follows.367 In section 104 (application of Chapter 1 of Part 5: partner authorities), for subsection (2)(e) substitute—“(e)	a local policing body;”.368 In section 123 (joint overview and scrutiny committees), in subsection (7) for “a police authority” substitute “ a local policing body ”.369 In section 212 (entities controlled etc by local authorities), in subsection (7), in paragraph (a) of the definition of “local authority”, after “that Act)” insert “ , apart from a police and crime commissioner ”.
336	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 16 – Police reform: minor and consequential amendmentsDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)Serious Crime Act 2007370 In the Serious Crime Act 2007, in section 39 (compliance with orders: authorised monitors), in subsection (10), in the definition of “law enforcement agency”—(a) before paragraph (a) insert—“(za) the chief constable of a police force maintained under section 2 of the Police Act 1996;(zb) the Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis;(zc) the Common Council of the City of London in its capacity as police authority;”;(b) in paragraph (a), omit “a police authority or”.Pensions Act 2008371 (1) In the Pensions Act 2008, section 95 (police) is amended as follows.(2) In subsection (1), after “by the” insert “ relevant local policing body or ”.(3) In subsection (2)—(a) after “A” (in the first place) insert “ local policing body, or a ”;(b) after “relevant” insert “ local policing body, or relevant ”.Coroners and Justice Act 2009372 In the Coroners and Justice Act 2009, in section 24 (provision of staff and accommodation), in subsection (2), for “police authority” substitute “ local policing body ”.Local Democracy, Economic Development and Construction Act 2009373 The Local Democracy, Economic Development and Construction Act 2009 is amended as follows.
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 16 – Police reform: minor and consequential amendments Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)374 In section 2 (democratic arrangements of connected authorities)—(a) for subsection (3)(f) substitute—“(f)	a local policing body;”;(b) for subsection (5)(e) substitute—“(e)	a local policing body;”.
337
375 In section 23 (duty of public authorities to secure involvement), in subsection (2), for paragraph (j) substitute—“(j)	the Common Council of the City of London in its capacity as a police authority;”.376 In section 35 (mutual insurance: supplementary), in subsection (2), for paragraph (k) substitute—“(k)	the Common Council of the City of London in its capacity as a police authority;”.F245377	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Policing and Crime Act 2009378 In the Policing and Crime Act 2009, in section 2 (Police Senior Appointments Panel), omit subsection (1).378 
338	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 16 – Police reform: minor and consequential amendmentsDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)Child Poverty Act 2010379 In the Child Poverty Act 2010, in section 20(2)(b) (partner authorities), for “police authority” substitute “ local policing body ”.Equality Act 2010380 The Equality Act 2010 is amended as follows.381 In section 1 (public sector duty regarding socio-economic duties), in subsection (3) (k), for “police authority” substitute “ police and crime commissioner ”.382 In section 43 (interpretation of section 42)—(a) in subsection (3), for “police authority” (in each place) substitute “ local policing body or police authority ”;(b) in subsection (8), for paragraph (d) substitute—“(d)	the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011.”.383 In Schedule 19 (public authorities), in Part 1, under the heading “Police”, for “The Metropolitan” to “section 3 of that Act”, substitute—“A police and crime commissioner established under section 1 of the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011.The Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime established under section 3 of that Act.”.
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13) SCHEDULE 17 – Temporary class drug orders Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)
339
SCHEDULE 17	Section 151TEMPORARY CLASS DRUG ORDERSAmendments of the Misuse of Drugs Act 19711 The Misuse of Drugs Act 1971 is amended in accordance with paragraphs 2 to 20.2 In section 2 (controlled drugs and their classification for purposes of Act), in subsection (1)—(a) in paragraph (a), for the words after “specified” substitute “—(i) in Part I, II or III of Schedule 2, or(ii) in a temporary class drug order as a drug subject to temporary control (but this is subject to section 2A(6));”, and(b) at the end of paragraph (b) insert “, and(c) the expression “temporary class drug” means any substance or product which is for the time being a controlled drug by virtue of a temporary class drug order;”.3 After section 2 insert—“2A Temporary class drug orders(1) The Secretary of State may make an order (referred to in this Act as a “temporary class drug order”) specifying any substance or product as a drug subject to temporary control if the following two conditions are met.(2) The first condition is that the substance or product is not a Class A drug, a Class B drug or a Class C drug.(3) The second condition is that—(a) the Secretary of State has consulted in accordance with section 2B and has determined that the order should be made, or(b) the Secretary of State has received a recommendation under that section that the order should be made.(4) The Secretary of State may make the determination mentioned in subsection (3)(a) only if it appears to the Secretary of State that—(a) the substance or product is a drug that is being, or is likely to be, misused, and(b) that misuse is having, or is capable of having, harmful effects.(5) A substance or product may be specified in a temporary class drug order by reference to—(1) 
340	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 17 – Temporary class drug ordersDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)(a) the name of the substance or product, or(b) a description of the substance or product (which may take such form as the Secretary of State thinks appropriate for the purposes of the specification).(6) A substance or product specified in a temporary class drug order as a drug subject to temporary control ceases to be a controlled drug by virtue of the order—(a) at the end of one year beginning with the day on which the order comes into force, or(b) if earlier, upon the coming into force of an Order in Council under section 2(2) by virtue of which the substance or product is specified in Part 1, 2 or 3 of Schedule 2.(7) Subsection (6)—(a) is subject to subsection (10), and(b) is without prejudice to the power of the Secretary of State to vary or revoke a temporary class drug order by a further order.(8) The power of the Secretary of State to make an order under this section is subject to section 2B.(9) An order under this section is to be made by statutory instrument.(10) An order under this section—(a) must be laid before Parliament after being made, and(b) ceases to have effect at the end of the period of 40 days beginning with the day on which the order is made unless before the end of that period the order is approved by a resolution of each House of Parliament.(11) In calculating that period of 40 days no account is to be taken of any time during which Parliament is dissolved or prorogued or during which both Houses are adjourned for more than 4 days.(12) Subsection (10)(b)—(a) is without prejudice to anything previously done or to the power of the Secretary of State to make a new order under this section;(b) does not apply to an order that only revokes a previous order under this section.2B Orders under section 2A: role of Advisory Council etc(1) Before making an order under section 2A the Secretary of State—(a) must consult as mentioned in subsection (2), or(b) must have received a recommendation from the Advisory Council to make the order.(2) The Secretary of State must consult—(a) the Advisory Council, or(b) if the order is to be made under section 2A(1) and the urgency condition applies, the person mentioned in subsection (3).(a) 
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13) SCHEDULE 17 – Temporary class drug orders Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)
341
(3) The person referred to in subsection (2)(b) is—(a) the person who is for the time being the chairman of the Advisory Council appointed under paragraph 1(3) of Schedule 1, or(b) if that person has delegated the function of responding to consultation under subsection (1)(a) to another member of the Advisory Council, that other member.(4) The “urgency condition” applies if it appears to the Secretary of State that the misuse of the substance or product to be specified in the order as a drug subject to temporary control, or the likelihood of its misuse, poses an urgent and significant threat to public safety or health.(5) The duty of the Advisory Council or any other person consulted under subsection (1)(a) is limited to giving to the Secretary of State that person's opinion as to whether the order in question should be made.(6) A recommendation under subsection (1)(b) that a temporary class drug order should be made may be given by the Advisory Council only if it appears to the Council that—(a) the substance or product is a drug that is being, or is likely to be, misused, and(b) that misuse is having, or is capable of having, harmful effects.”.4 In section 3 (restriction of importation and exportation of controlled drugs), in subsection (2)(a) after “this Act” insert “ or by provision made in a temporary class drug order by virtue of section 7A ”.5 In section 4(1) (restriction of production and supply of controlled drugs), after “this Act” insert “ , or any provision made in a temporary class drug order by virtue of section 7A, ”.6 In section 5 (restriction of possession of controlled drugs), after subsection (2) insert—“(2A) Subsections (1) and (2) do not apply in relation to a temporary class drug.”.
342	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 17 – Temporary class drug ordersDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)7 In section 7 (authorisation of activities otherwise unlawful under foregoing provisions of Act), after subsection (9) insert—“(10) In this section a reference to “controlled drugs” does not include a reference to temporary class drugs (see instead section 7A).”.8 After section 7 insert—“7A Temporary class drug orders: power to make further provision(1) This section applies if a temporary class drug order specifies a substance or product as a drug subject to temporary control.(2) The order may—(a) include provision for the exception of the drug from the application of section 3(1)(a) or (b) or 4(1)(a) or (b),(b) make such other provision as the Secretary of State thinks fit for the purpose of making it lawful for persons to do things in respect of the drug which under section 4(1) it would otherwise be unlawful for them to do,(c) provide for circumstances in which a person's possession of the drug is to be treated as excepted possession for the purposes of this Act, and(d) include any provision in relation to the drug of a kind that could be made in regulations under section 10 or 22 if the drug were a Class A drug, a Class B drug or a Class C drug (but ignoring section 31(3)).(3) Provision under subsection (2) may take the form of applying (with or without modifications) any provision made in regulations under section 7(1), 10 or 22.(4) Provision under subsection (2)(b) may (in particular) provide for the doing of something to be lawful if it is done—(a) in circumstances mentioned in section 7(2)(a), or(b) in compliance with such conditions as may be prescribed by virtue of section 7(2)(b).(5) Section 7(8) applies for the purposes of this section.(6) Section 31(1) (general provision as to regulations) applies in relation to a temporary class drug order that contains provision made by virtue of this section as it applies to regulations under this Act.”.9 In section 9A (prohibition of supply etc of articles for administering or preparing controlled drugs), in subsection (4)—1 
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13) SCHEDULE 17 – Temporary class drug orders Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)
343
(a) at the end of paragraph (a) omit “or”,(b) in paragraph (b) after “of a controlled drug” insert “ , other than a temporary class drug, ”, and(c) at the end of that paragraph insert “, or(c) the administration by any person of a temporary class drug to himself in circumstances where having the drug in his possession is to be treated as excepted possession for the purposes of this Act (see section 7A(2)(c)).”.10 In section 10 (power to make regulations for preventing misuse of controlled drugs), after subsection (2) insert—“(3) In this section a reference to “controlled drugs” does not include a reference to temporary class drugs (see instead section 7A).”.11 In section 11 (power to direct special precautions for safe custody of controlled drugs to be taken at certain premises), in subsection (1) after “of this Act” insert “ or by provision made in a temporary class drug order by virtue of section 7A that is of a corresponding description to such regulations ”.12 (1) Section 13 (directions prohibiting prescribing, supply etc of controlled drugs by practitioners in other cases) is amended as follows.(2) In subsection (1)—(a) after “section 10(2) of this Act” insert “ or of corresponding provision made in a temporary class drug order ”, and(b) after “said paragraph (i)” insert “ or of any such corresponding provision ”.(3) After subsection (1) insert—“(1A) For the purposes of subsection (1), provision made in a temporary class drug order is “corresponding provision” if it—(a) is made by virtue of section 7A(2)(d), and(b) is of a corresponding description to regulations made in pursuance of section 10(2)(h) or (as the case may be) 10(2)(i).”.
344	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 17 – Temporary class drug ordersDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)13 In section 18 (miscellaneous offences), after subsection (4) insert—“(5) In this section (and in references in Schedule 4 that refer to this section), any reference to regulations made under this Act is to be taken as including a reference to provision made in a temporary class drug order by virtue of section 7A.(6) For this purpose, a reference in subsection (1) or (2) to regulations made in pursuance of section 10(2)(h) or (i) is a reference to any provision of a temporary class drug order which—(a) is made by virtue of section 7A(2)(d), and(b) is of a corresponding description to regulations made in pursuance of section 10(2)(h) or (as the case may be) (i).”.14 In section 22 (further power to make regulations)—(a) renumber the existing provision as subsection (1), and(b) after that subsection insert—“(2) The power to make regulations under this section does not apply in relation to temporary class drugs (see instead section 7A).”.15 (1) Section 23 (powers to search and obtain evidence) is amended as follows.(2) In subsection (2) after “any regulations” insert “ or orders ”.(3) In subsection (3)(a) after “any regulations” insert “ or orders ”.16 After section 23 insert—“23A Temporary class drugs: further power to search, seize and detain(1) Subsection (3) applies in any case where—(a) a constable has reasonable grounds to suspect that a person (“P”) is in possession of a temporary class drug, and(b) it does not appear to the constable that a power under section 23(2) applies to the case.(2) But if any provision has been made by virtue of section 7A(2)(c) (excepted possession) that applies to the temporary class drug in question, subsection (3) applies only if the constable has no reason to believe that P's(1) 
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13) SCHEDULE 17 – Temporary class drug orders Document Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)
345
possession of the drug is to be treated as excepted possession for the purposes of this Act.(3) The constable may—(a) search P, and detain P for the purposes of searching P;(b) search any vehicle or vessel in which the constable suspects that the drug may be found, and for that purpose require the person in control of the vehicle or vessel to stop it;(c) seize and detain anything found in the course of the search which appears to the constable to be a temporary class drug or to be evidence of an offence under this Act.In this subsection, “vessel” has the same meaning as in section 23(2).(4) Subsection (5) applies if a constable reasonably believes that anything detained under subsection (3)(c) is a temporary class drug but is not evidence of any offence under this Act.(5) The constable may dispose of the drug in such manner as the constable thinks appropriate.(6) A person who intentionally obstructs a constable in the exercise of the constable's powers under subsection (3) commits an offence.”.17 (1) Section 25 (prosecution and punishment of offences) is amended as follows.(2) After subsection (2) insert—“(2A) Subsection (2B) applies if an offence specified in the first column of Schedule 4 is committed in relation to a temporary class drug.(2B) The punishments which may be imposed on a person convicted of the offence summarily or (as the case may be) on indictment in relation to the temporary class drug are the same as those which could be imposed had the person been convicted of the offence in that way in relation to a Class B drug (see the fifth column of Schedule 4).”.(3) After subsection (3) insert—“(3A) The punishments which may be imposed on a person convicted of an offence under section 23A(6) are the same as those which, under Schedule 4, may be imposed on a person convicted of an offence under section 23(4).”.18 In section 30 (licenses and authorities) after “of regulations” insert “ or orders ”.1 
346	Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)SCHEDULE 17 – Temporary class drug ordersDocument Generated: 2024-07-09Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)19 In section 37(1) (interpretation), after the definition of “supplying” insert— ““temporary class drug order” means an order made under section 2A(1);”.20 In section 38(1) (special provisions as to Northern Ireland) for “2, 7,” substitute “ 2, 2A, 2B, 7, 7A, ”.Amendments of other legislation21 In Schedule 1 to the Customs and Excise Management Act 1979 (controlled drugs: variation of punishments for certain offences)—(a) in paragraph 1—(i) in the opening words for “or a Class B drug” substitute “ , Class B drug or a temporary class drug ”, and(ii) in paragraph (b)(ii) of the substituted words after “ Class B drug ” insert “ or a temporary class drug ”, and(b) in paragraph 3, for “and “Class C drug”” substitute “, “Class C drug” and “temporary class drug””.22 In section 19 of the Criminal Justice (International Co-operation) Act 1990 (ships used for illicit traffic), in subsection (4)(b) after “Class B drug” insert “ or a temporary class drug ”.
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13) Document Generated: 2024-07-09
347

Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesPolice Reform Act 20022002 CHAPTER 30An Act to make new provision about the supervision, administration, functions and conduct of police forces, police officers and other persons serving with, or carrying out functions in relation to, the police; to amend police powers and to provide for the exercise of police powers by persons who are not police officers; to amend the law relating to anti-social behaviour orders; to amend the law relating to sex offender orders; and for connected purposes.	[24th July 2002]BE IT ENACTED by the Queen’s most Excellent Majesty, by and with the advice and consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons, in this present Parliament assembled, and by the authority of the same, as follows:—PART 1POWERS OF THE SECRETARY OF STATE1 National Policing PlanAfter section 36 of the 1996 Act there shall be inserted—
2 Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)Part 1 – Powers of the Secretary of StateDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes“36A National Policing Plan(1) It shall be the duty of the Secretary of State, before the beginning of each financial year, to prepare a National Policing Plan for that year.(2) The Secretary of State shall lay the National Policing Plan for a financial year before Parliament.(3) Subject to subsection (4), any such plan must be laid before Parliament not later than 30th November in the preceding financial year.(4) If there are exceptional circumstances, any such plan may be laid before Parliament after the date mentioned in subsection (3); but it must be so laid before the beginning of the financial year to which it relates.(5) If a plan is laid before Parliament after the date mentioned in subsection (3), the plan must contain a statement of the exceptional circumstances that gave rise to its being so laid.(6) The National Policing Plan for a financial year—(a) must set out whatever the Secretary of State considers to be the strategic policing priorities generally for the police forces maintained for police areas in England and Wales for the period of three years beginning with that year;(b) must describe what, in relation to that period, the Secretary of State is intending or proposing so far as each of the following is concerned—(i) the setting of objectives under section 37 and the giving of general directions in relation to any objective so set;(ii) the specification, under section 4 of the Local Government Act 1999 (c. 27) (performance indicators), of performance indicators (within the meaning of that section) for police authorities;(iii) the making of regulations under the powers conferred by this Act, by Part 4 of the Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16) (police training) and by Part 2 of the Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30) (complaints etc.);(iv) the issuing of guidance under any provision of this Act or of Part 2 of the Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30); and(v) the issuing and revision of codes of practice under this Act and under Chapter 1 of Part 4 of the Police Reform Act 2002 (powers exercisable by civilians);(c) may contain such other information, plans and advice as the Secretary of State considers relevant to the priorities set out in the plan.(7) Before laying the National Policing Plan for a financial year before Parliament, the Secretary of State shall consult with—(a) persons whom he considers to represent the interests of police authorities;(b) persons whom he considers to represent the interests of chief officers of police; and(c) such other persons as he thinks fit.(a) 
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)	3Part 1 – Powers of the Secretary of StateDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(8) In this section—  “financial year” means the period of twelve months ending with 31st March; and  “general direction” means a direction under section 38 establishing performance targets for all police authorities to which section 37 applies.”2 Codes of practice for chief officersAfter section 39 of the 1996 Act (codes of practice for police authorities) there shall be inserted—“39A Codes of practice for chief officers(1) If the Secretary of State considers it necessary to do so for the purpose of promoting the efficiency and effectiveness generally of the police forces maintained for police areas in England and Wales, he may issue codes of practice relating to the discharge of their functions by the chief officers of police of those forces.(2) The Secretary of State may from time to time revise the whole or any part of a code of practice issued under this section.(3) Where the Secretary of State proposes to issue or revise a code of practice under this section, he shall first require the Central Police Training and Development Authority to prepare a draft of the code or of the revisions; and the draft prepared by that Authority must contain all such matters as the Secretary of State may specify in the requirement.(4) Before preparing a draft code of practice under this section or any draft revisions of such a code, the Central Police Training and Development Authority shall consult with—(a) persons whom it considers to represent the interests of police authorities;(b) persons whom it considers to represent the interests of chief officers of police; and(c) such other persons as it thinks fit.(5) The Secretary of State shall lay any code of practice issued by him under this section, and any revision of any such code, before Parliament.(6) The Secretary of State shall not be required by subsection (5) to lay before Parliament, or may exclude from what he does so lay, anything the publication of which, in his opinion—(a) would be against the interests of national security;(b) could prejudice the prevention or detection of crime or the apprehension or prosecution of offenders; or(c) could jeopardise the safety of any person.(7) In discharging any function to which a code of practice under this section relates, a chief officer of police shall have regard to the code.”(1) 
4	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)Part 1 – Powers of the Secretary of StateDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes3 Powers to require inspection and report(1) In section 54 of the 1996 Act (appointment and functions of inspectors of constabulary), after subsection (2A) there shall be inserted—“(2B) The Secretary of State may at any time require the inspectors of constabulary to carry out an inspection under this section of—(a) a police force maintained for any police area;(b) the National Criminal Intelligence Service; or(c) the National Crime Squad;and a requirement under this subsection may include a requirement for the inspection to be confined to a particular part of the force, Service or Squad in question, to particular matters or to particular activities of that force, Service or Squad.(2C) Where the inspectors carry out an inspection under subsection (2B), they shall send a report on that inspection to the Secretary of State.”;and in section 55(1) of that Act (publication of reports) for “or (2A)” there shall be substituted “ , (2A) or (2C) ”.(2) In section 41 of the Police (Northern Ireland) Act 1998 (c. 32) (appointment and functions of inspectors), after subsection (3) there shall be inserted—“(3A) The Secretary of State may at any time require the inspectors to carry out an inspection under this section of—(a) the Police Service of Northern Ireland; or(b) the National Criminal Intelligence Service;and a requirement under this subsection may include a requirement for the inspection to be confined to a particular part of the Service in question, to particular matters or to particular activities of that Service.(3B) Where the inspectors carry out an inspection under subsection (3A), they shall send a report on that inspection to the Secretary of State.”;and in section 42(1) of that Act (publication of reports) for “or (3)” there shall be substituted “ , (3) or (3B) ”.4 Directions to police authoritiesFor section 40 of the 1996 Act (power to give directions in response to report on an inspection of a police force carried out for the purposes of that section) there shall be substituted—“40 Power to give directions to a police authority(1) Where a report made to the Secretary of State on an inspection under section 54 states, in relation to any police force maintained under section 2, or in relation to the metropolitan police force—(a) that, in the opinion of the person making the report, the whole or any part of the force inspected is, whether generally or in particular respects, not efficient or not effective, or(a) 
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)	5Part 1 – Powers of the Secretary of StateDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(b) that, in that person’s opinion, the whole or a part of the force will cease to be efficient or effective, whether generally or in particular respects, unless remedial measures are taken,the Secretary of State may direct the police authority responsible for maintaining that force to take such remedial measures as may be specified in the direction.(2) Those remedial measures must not relate to any matter other than—(a) a matter by reference to which the report contains a statement of opinion falling within subsection (1)(a) or (b); or(b) a matter that the Secretary of State considers relevant to any matter falling within paragraph (a).(3) If the Secretary of State exercises his power to give a direction under this section in relation to a police force—(a) he shall prepare a report on his exercise of that power in relation to that force; and(b) he shall lay that report before Parliament.(4) A report under subsection (3)—(a) shall be prepared at such time as the Secretary of State considers appropriate; and(b) may relate to more than one exercise of the power mentioned in that subsection.(5) The Secretary of State shall not give a direction under this section in relation to any police force unless—(a) the police authority maintaining that force and the chief officer of that force have each been given such information about the Secretary of State’s grounds for proposing to give that direction as he considers appropriate for enabling them to make representations or proposals under the following paragraphs of this subsection;(b) that police authority and chief officer have each been given an opportunity of making representations about those grounds;(c) that police authority has had an opportunity of making proposals for the taking of remedial measures that would make the giving of the direction unnecessary; and(d) the Secretary of State has considered any such representations and any such proposals.(6) The Secretary of State may by regulations make further provision as to the procedure to be followed in cases where a proposal is made for the giving of a direction under this section.(7) Before making any regulations under this section, the Secretary of State shall consult with—(a) persons whom he considers to represent the interests of police authorities;(b) persons whom he considers to represent the interests of chief officers of police; and(c) such other persons as he thinks fit.(a) 
6	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)Part 1 – Powers of the Secretary of StateDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(8) Regulations under this section may make different provision for different cases and circumstances.(9) A statutory instrument containing regulations under this section shall not be made unless a draft of the regulations has been laid before Parliament and approved by a resolution of each House.”5 Directions as to action plansF1. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .6 Regulation of equipmentFor subsections (2) and (3) of section 53 of the 1996 Act (regulations as to standard of equipment), there shall be substituted—“(1A) The Secretary of State may by regulations make any or all of the following provisions—(a) provision requiring all police forces in England and Wales, when using equipment for the purposes specified in the regulations to use only—(i) the equipment which is specified in the regulations;(ii) equipment which is of a description so specified; or(iii) equipment which is of a type approved by the Secretary of State in accordance with the regulations;(b) provision requiring all police forces in England and Wales to keep available for use the equipment falling within paragraph (a)(i) to (iii) which is specified or described in, or approved in accordance with, the regulations;(c) provision prohibiting all police forces in England and Wales from using equipment of a type approved as mentioned in paragraph (a)(iii) except—(i) where the conditions subject to which the approval was given are satisfied; and(ii) in accordance with the other terms of that approval;(d) provision requiring equipment used by police forces in England and Wales to comply, in the case of all police forces, with such conditions as may be specified in the regulations, or as may be approved by the Secretary of State in accordance with the regulations;(e) provision prohibiting all police forces in England and Wales from using equipment specified in the regulations, or any equipment of a description so specified.(1B) The Secretary of State shall not make any regulations under subsection (1A) unless he considers it necessary to do so for the purpose of promoting the
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)	7Part 1 – Powers of the Secretary of StateDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesefficiency and effectiveness generally of the police forces maintained for police areas in England and Wales.(2) Before making any regulations under this section, the Secretary of State shall consult with—(a) persons whom he considers to represent the interests of police authorities;(b) persons whom he considers to represent the interests of chief officers of police; and(c) such other persons as he thinks fit.(2A) Regulations under this section may make different provision for different cases and circumstances.(2B) A statutory instrument containing any regulations under this section shall be subject to annulment in pursuance of a resolution of either House of Parliament.(2C) In this section “equipment” includes—(a) vehicles; and(b) headgear and protective and other clothing.”7 Regulation of procedures and practicesAfter section 53 of the 1996 Act there shall be inserted—“53A Regulation of procedures and practices(1) The Secretary of State may by regulations make provision requiring all police forces in England and Wales—(a) to adopt particular procedures or practices; or(b) to adopt procedures or practices of a particular description.(2) Before making any regulations under this section, the Secretary of State shall seek advice from—(a) the chief inspector of constabulary; and(b) the Central Police Training and Development Authority.(3) Before seeking advice under subsection (2) the Secretary of State shall consult about his proposal to do so with—(a) persons whom he considers to represent the interests of police authorities; and(b) persons whom he considers to represent the interests of chief officers of police.(4) A request for the purposes of subsection (2) may specify a period within which the requested advice is to be provided; and, if a period is so specified, the requested advice must be provided within it.(5) Before giving any advice in response to a request for the purposes of subsection (2), the Central Police Training and Development Authority shall consult with—(1) 
8 Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)Part 1 – Powers of the Secretary of StateDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(a) persons whom it considers to represent the interests of police authorities;(b) persons whom it considers to represent the interests of chief officers of police; and(c) such other persons as it thinks fit.(6) The Secretary of State shall not make any regulations under this section requiring the adoption of any procedure or practice unless—(a) he has, as respects that procedure or practice, received advice from the Central Police Training and Development Authority and has considered that advice;(b) the advice of the chief inspector of constabulary states that that inspector is satisfied as to the matters mentioned in subsection (7); and(c) the Secretary of State himself is satisfied as to those matters.(7) Those matters are—(a) that the adoption of that procedure or practice is necessary in order to facilitate the carrying out by members of any two or more police forces of joint or co-ordinated operations;(b) that the making of regulations is necessary for securing the adoption of that procedure or practice; and(c) that securing the adoption of that procedure or practice is in the national interest.(8) Regulations under this section may make different provision for different cases and circumstances.(9) A statutory instrument containing the first regulations to be made under this section shall not be made unless a draft of the regulations has been laid before Parliament and approved by a resolution of each House.(10) A statutory instrument containing any other regulations under this section shall be subject to annulment in pursuance of a resolution of either House of Parliament.”8 Equivalent provision for NCIS and NCSF2. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)	9Part 2 – Complaints and MisconductDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesPART 2COMPLAINTS AND MISCONDUCTModifications etc. (not altering text)C3	Pt. 2 power to apply amend or modify conferred (31.10.2011) by Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13), s. 157(1), Sch. 7 para. 7(1); S.I. 2011/2515, art. 2(d)C4	Pt. 2 applied (with modifications) (22.11.2012) by The Police (Complaints and Misconduct) Regulations 2012 (S.I. 2012/1204), regs. 1(1), 35(1) (with reg. 35(2))C5	Pt. 2 applied (with modifications) (22.11.2012) by The Police (Complaints and Misconduct) Regulations 2012 (S.I. 2012/1204), regs. 1(1), 27C6	Pt. 2 applied (with modifications) (9.8.2013) by The Police (Complaints and Misconduct)(Old Cases) Regulations 2013 (S.I. 2013/1778), regs. 1(1), 2C7	Pt. 2 modified (8.4.2015) by The Independent Police Complaints Commission (Complaints and Misconduct) (Contractors) Regulations 2015 (S.I. 2015/431), regs. 1, 4, Sch.C8	Pt. 2: power to amend conferred (E.W.) (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 17.7.2017 in so far as not already in force) by 2009 c. 20, s. 107EE(4) (as inserted by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), ss. 8(2), 183(1)(5)(e); S.I. 2017/726, reg. 2(a))C9	Pt. 2: power to amend conferred (E.W.) (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 3.4.2017 in so far as not already in force) by 2004 c. 21, s. 4K(2)(4) (as inserted by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 1 para. 5; S.I. 2017/399, reg. 2, Sch. para. 38)C10 Pt. 2 modified (15.12.2017) by S.I. 2012/1204, Sch. Pt. 1 (as inserted by The Police (Conduct, Complaints and Misconduct and Appeal Tribunal) (Amendment) Regulations 2017 (S.I. 2017/1134), reg. 1(1), Sch. 2 (with reg. 2))C11 Pt. 2 applied (with application in accordance with reg. 1(3) of the amending S.I.) by The Police (Complaints and Misconduct) Regulations 2020 (S.I. 2020/2), regs. 1(1), 43(3)C12 Pt. 2 applied (with modifications) (with application in accordance with reg. 1(3) of the amending S.I.) by The Police (Complaints and Misconduct) Regulations 2020 (S.I. 2020/2), regs. 1(1), 52C13 Pt. 2 applied (with modifications) (with application in accordance with reg. 1(3) of the amending S.I.) by The Police (Complaints and Misconduct) Regulations 2020 (S.I. 2020/2), regs. 1(1), 42(1), Sch. 2C14 Pt. 2 applied (with modifications) (with application in accordance with reg. 1(3) of the amending S.I.) by The Police (Complaints and Misconduct) Regulations 2020 (S.I. 2020/2), regs. 1(1), 43(1)(2)C15 Pt. 2 applied (with modifications) (with application in accordance with reg. 1(3) of the amending S.I.) by The Police (Complaints and Misconduct) Regulations 2020 (S.I. 2020/2), regs. 1(1), 42(2)C16 Pt. 2: power to amend conferred (E.W.) (26.12.2023) by Levelling Up and Regeneration Act 2023 (c. 55), ss. 38, 255(2)(c) (with s. 247)C17 Pt. 2 (ss. 9-29) applied (with modifications) (1.4.2004) by The Police (Complaints and Misconduct) Regulations 2004 (S.I. 2004/643), regs. 21, 29, 30C18  Pt. 2 (ss. 9-29) applied (1.4.2004) by The Police (Complaints and Misconduct) Regulations 2004 (S.I.2004/643), reg. 28C19 Pt. 2 (ss. 9-29) excluded (1.4.2004) by The Independent Police Complaints Commission (Transitional Provisions) Order 2004 (S.I. 2004/671), arts. 2(2), 3C20 Pt. 2 (ss. 9-29) excluded (E.W.) (28.12.2005) by The Revenue and Customs (Complaints and Misconduct) Regulations 2005 (S.I. 2005/3311), regs. 3(7), 8, 9C21 Pt. 2 (ss. 9-29): power to apply conferred (7.4.2005 at 5.45 p.m.) by Commissioners for Revenue and Customs Act 2005 (c. 11), ss. 28(2)(a), 53; S.I. 2005/1126, art. 2
10	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)Part 2 – Complaints and MisconductDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes[F3The Independent Office for Police Conduct]9 [F4The Independent Office for Police Conduct][F5(1) The body corporate previously known as the Independent Police Complaints Commission—(a) is to continue to exist, and(b) is to be known instead as the Independent Office for Police Conduct.][F6(2) The Office is to consist of—(a) a Director General appointed by Her Majesty, and(b) at least six other members.(2A) The other members must consist of—(a) persons appointed as non-executive members (see paragraph 1A of Schedule 2), and(b) persons appointed as employee members (see paragraph 1B of that Schedule),but the powers of appointment under those paragraphs must be exercised so as to secure that a majority of members of the Office (including the Director General) are non-executive members.](3) A person shall not be appointed as the [F7Director General]F8... if—(a) he holds or has held office as a constable in any part of the United Kingdom;(b) he is or has been under the direction and control of a chief officer or of any person holding an equivalent office in Scotland or Northern Ireland;(c) he is a person in relation to whom a designation under section 39 is or has been in force;(d) he is a person in relation to whom an accreditation under section 41 [F9or 41A] is or has been in force;[F10(da)	he F11... has been the chairman or a member of, or a member of the staff of, the Serious Organised Crime Agency;][F12(db)	he F13... has been—(i) the chairman or chief executive of, or(ii) another member of, or(iii) another member of the staff of,the National Policing Improvement Agency;][F14(dc)	the person is, or has been, a National Crime Agency officer;](e) he F15. . . has been a member of the National Criminal Intelligence Service or the National Crime Squad; or(f) he is or has at any time been a member of a body of constables which at the time of his membership is or was a body of constables in relation to which any procedures are or were in force by virtue of an agreement or order under—(i) section 26 of this Act; or(i) 
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)	11Part 2 – Complaints and MisconductDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(ii) section 78 of the 1996 Act or section 96 of the 1984 Act (which made provision corresponding to that made by section 26 of this Act).(4) An appointment made in contravention of subsection (3) shall have no effect.(5) [F16Neither the Office nor the Director General shall—](a) be regarded as the servant or agent of the Crown; or(b) enjoy any status, privilege or immunity of the Crown;and the [F17Office's] property shall not be regarded as property of, or property held on behalf of, the Crown.(6) Schedule 2 (which makes further provision in relation to the [F18Office]) shall have effect.(7) The Police Complaints Authority shall cease to exist on such day as the Secretary of State may by order appoint.Textual AmendmentsF4	S. 9 heading substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), ss. 33(3), 183(1)(5)(e); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)F5	S. 9(1) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), ss. 33(4), 183(1)(5)(e); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)F6  S. 9(2)(2A) substituted for s. 9(2) (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 3.4.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), ss. 33(5), 183(1)(5) (e); S.I. 2017/399, reg. 2, Sch. para. 6; S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)F7	Words in s. 9(3) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 3.4.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), ss. 33(6)(a), 183(1) (5)(e); S.I. 2017/399, reg. 2, Sch. para. 6; S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)F8  Words in s. 9(3) omitted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 3.4.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by virtue of Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), ss. 33(6)(b), 183(1) (5)(e); S.I. 2017/399, reg. 2, Sch. para. 6; S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)F9  Words in s. 9(3)(d) inserted (1.4.2007) by Police and Justice Act 2006 (c. 48), ss. 52, 53, Sch. 14 para.40; S.I. 2007/709, art. 3(p) (subject to arts. 6, 7)F10  S. 9(3)(da) inserted (1.4.2006) by Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15), ss. 55, 178,Sch. 2 para. 2(a); S.I. 2006/378, art. 4(1), Sch. para. 8 (subject to art. 4(2)-(7))F11  Words in s. 9(3)(da) omitted (7.10.2013) by virtue of Crime and Courts Act 2013 (c. 22), s. 61(2), Sch.8 para. 153(1)(a); S.I. 2013/1682, art. 3(v)F12  S. 9(3)(db) inserted (1.4.2007) by Police and Justice Act 2006 (c. 48), ss. 1, 53, Sch. 1 para. 81; S.I.2007/709, art. 3(a) (subject to arts. 6, 7)F13  Words in s. 9(3)(db) omitted (7.10.2013) by virtue of Crime and Courts Act 2013 (c. 22), s. 61(2), Sch.8 para. 153(1)(b); S.I. 2013/1682, art. 3(v)F14 S. 9(3)(dc) inserted (7.10.2013) by Crime and Courts Act 2013 (c. 22), s. 61(2), Sch. 8 para. 153(1) (c); S.I. 2013/1682, art. 3(v)F15  Words in s. 9(3)(e) repealed (1.4.2006) by Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15),ss. 55, 174, 178, Sch. 2 para. 2(b), Sch. 17 Pt. 2; S.I. 2006/378, art. 4(1), Sch. paras. 8, 12, 13(oo) (subject to art. 4(2)-(7))F16 Words in s. 9(5) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), ss. 33(7)(a), 183(1)(5)(e); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)F17 Word in s. 9(5) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), ss. 33(7)(b), 183(1)(5)(e); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)
12	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)Part 2 – Complaints and MisconductDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes10 General functions of the [F19Director General](1) The functions of the [F19Director General] shall be—(a) to secure the maintenance by the [F19Director General]F20..., and by [F21local policing bodies] and chief officers, of suitable arrangements with respect to the matters mentioned in subsection (2);(b) to keep under review all arrangements maintained with respect to those matters;(c) to secure that arrangements maintained with respect to those matters comply with the requirements of the following provisions of this Part, are efficient and effective and contain and manifest an appropriate degree of independence;(d) to secure that public confidence is established and maintained in the existence of suitable arrangements with respect to those matters and with the operation of the arrangements that are in fact maintained with respect to those matters;(e) to make such recommendations, and to give such advice, for the modification of the arrangements maintained with respect to those matters, and also of police practice in relation to other matters, as appear, from the carrying out by the [F19Director General] of [F22the Director General's] other functions, to be necessary or desirable; F23. . .(f) to such extent as [F24the Director General] may be required to do so by regulations made by the Secretary of State, to carry out functions in relation to F25. . . bodies of constables maintained otherwise than by [F26local policing bodies] which broadly correspond to those conferred on the [F19Director General] in relation to police forces by the preceding paragraphs of this subsection[F27; F28. . .(g) to carry out functions in relation to the [F29National Crime Agency] which correspond to those conferred on the [F19Director General] in relation to police forces by paragraph (e) of this subsection][F30; and(a) 
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)	13Part 2 – Complaints and MisconductDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
[F31(ga)
to carry out such corresponding functions in relation to officers of the Gangmasters and Labour Abuse Authority in their capacity as labour abuse prevention officers (see section 114B of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 (PACE powers for labour abuse prevention officers))][F32; and
(gb) to carry out such corresponding functions in relation to officers of the Food Standards Agency acting in the exercise of functions conferred on them by virtue of—(i) section 114C of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 (PACE powers for food crime officers), or(ii) section 39A of the Criminal Justice and Public Order Act 1994 (powers for food crime officers: inferences from silence).]F33(h)	](2) Those matters are—(a) the handling of complaints [F34(within the meaning given by section 12)][F35or other concerns raised by virtue of Part 2B (whistle-blowing)];(b) the recording of matters from which it appears that there may have been conduct by [F36persons serving with the police] which constitutes or involves the commission of a criminal offence or behaviour justifying disciplinary proceedings;[F37(ba) the recording of matters from which it appears that a person has died or suffered serious injury during, or following, contact with a person serving with the police;](c) the manner in which any such complaints [F38or other concerns] or any such matters as are mentioned in paragraph (b) [F39or (ba)] are investigated or otherwise handled and dealt with.(3) The [F19Director General] shall also have the functions which are conferred on [F40the Director General] by—(a) F41. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .(b) any agreement or order under section 26 of this Act (other bodies of constables);[F42(bc)	any regulations under section 26C of this Act (the National Crime Agency);] [F43(bd)	any regulations under section 26D of this Act (labour abuse preventionofficers);][F44(be)	any regulations under section 26E of this Act (food crime officers);](c) any regulations under section 39 of this Act (police powers for contracted- out staff); or(d) any regulations or arrangements relating to disciplinary or similar proceedings against persons serving with the police, or against members of F45	any bodyof constables maintained otherwise than by a [F46local policing body].[F47(3A) The [F19Director General] also has any functions conferred on [F48the Director General] by regulations under section 29C of this Act (regulations about super-complaints).][F49(3B) The [F19Director General] also has the functions which are conferred on [F50the Director General] by Part 2B (whistle-blowing).](4) It shall be the duty of the [F19Director General]—(a) to exercise the powers and perform the duties conferred on [F51the Director General] by the following provisions of this Part in the manner that [F51the Director General] considers best calculated for the purpose of securing the(a) 
14	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)Part 2 – Complaints and MisconductDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesproper carrying out of [F52the Director General's] functions under subsections(1) and (3); and(b) to secure that arrangements exist which are conducive to, and facilitate, the reporting of misconduct by persons in relation to whose conduct the [F19Director General] has functions.(5) It shall also be the duty of the [F19Director General]—(a) to enter into arrangements with the chief inspector of constabulary for the purpose of securing co-operation, in the carrying out of their respective functions, between the [F19Director General] and the inspectors of constabulary; and(b) to provide those inspectors with all such assistance and co-operation as may be required by those arrangements, or as otherwise appears to the [F19Director General] to be appropriate, for facilitating the carrying out by those inspectors of their functions.[F53(5A) In carrying out functions the Director General must have regard to any advice provided to the Director General by the Office (see section 10A(1)(c)).](6) Subject to the other provisions of this Part, the [F19Director General] may do anything which appears to [F54the Director General] to be calculated to facilitate, or is incidental or conducive to, the carrying out of [F55the Director General's] functions.(7) The [F56Office] may, in connection with the making of any recommendation or the giving of any advice to any person for the purpose of carrying out—(a) [F57the Director General's] function under subsection (1)(e), F58. . .(b) any corresponding function conferred on [F59the Director General] by virtue of subsection (1)(f), [F60or(c) [F57the Director General's] function under subsection (1)(g) [F61or (h)],]impose any such charge on that person for anything done by the [F19Director General] for the purposes of, or in connection with, the carrying out of that function as [F59the Director General] thinks fit.F62(8) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .F63(9) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)	15Part 2 – Complaints and MisconductDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesF24 Words in s. 10(1)(f) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 17(4); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)F25 Words in s. 10(1)(f) repealed (1.4.2006) by Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15), ss. 55, 174, 178, Sch. 2 para. 3(2)(b), Sch. 17 Pt. 2; S.I. 2006/378, art. 4(1), Sch. paras. 8, 12, 13(oo)(subject to art. 4(2)-(7))F26 Words in s. 10(1)(f) substituted (16.1.2012) by Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13), s. 157(1), Sch. 16 para. 278(2); S.I. 2011/3019, art. 3, Sch. 1F27 S. 10(1)(g) and preceding word inserted (1.4.2006) by Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15), ss. 55, 178, Sch. 2 para. 3(2)(c); S.I. 2006/378, art. 4(1), Sch. para. 8 (subject to art. 4(2)-(7))F28  Word in s. 10(1) repealed (1.4.2007) by Police and Justice Act 2006 (c. 48), ss. 52, 53, Sch. 15 Pt.1(A); S.I. 2007/709, art. 3(q) (subject to arts. 6, 7)F29 Words in s. 10(1)(g) substituted (7.10.2013) by Crime and Courts Act 2013 (c. 22), s. 61(2), Sch. 6 para. 9(2)(a); S.I. 2013/1682, art. 3(q)F30  S. 10(1)(h) and preceding word inserted (1.4.2007) by Police and Justice Act 2006 (c. 48), ss. 1, 53,Sch. 1 para. 82(2); S.I. 2007/709, art. 3(a) (subject to arts. 6, 7)F31  S. 10(1)(ga) inserted (12.7.2016) by Immigration Act 2016 (c. 19), s. 94(1), Sch. 3 para. 11(a); S.I.2016/603, reg. 3(u)F32  S. 10(1)(gb) and word inserted (28.6.2022) by Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32),ss. 54(4)(a)(i), 208(5)(f) (with s. 54(5)-(10))F33  S. 10(1)(h) omitted (7.10.2013) by virtue of Crime and Courts Act 2013 (c. 22), s. 61(2), Sch. 6 para.9(2)(b); S.I. 2013/1682, art. 3(q)F34 Words in s. 10(2)(a) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(5)(e), Sch. 4 para. 2(a); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(m) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))F35  Words in s. 10(2)(a) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3),ss. 34(3)(a), 183(1)(5)(e)F36 Words in s. 10(2)(b) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(5)(e), Sch. 4 para. 2(b); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(m) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))F37  S. 10(2)(ba) inserted (1.7.2005) by Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15), ss. 160, 178,Sch. 12 para. 2(2); S.I. 2005/1521, art. 3(1)(w)F38  Words in s. 10(2)(c) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3),ss. 34(3)(b), 183(1)(5)(e)F39  Words in s. 10(2)(c) inserted (1.7.2005) by Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15), ss.160, 178, Sch. 12 para. 2(3); S.I. 2005/1521, art. 3(1)(w)F40 Words in s. 10(3) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 17(5); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)F41 S. 10(3)(a) repealed (1.4.2006) by Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15), ss. 55, 174, 178, Sch. 2 para. 3(3)(a), Sch. 17 Pt. 2; S.I. 2006/378, art. 4(1), Sch. paras. 8, 12, 13(oo) (subject toart. 4(2)-(7))F42  S. 10(3)(bc) substituted for s. 10(3)(ba)(bb) (7.10.2013) by Crime and Courts Act 2013 (c. 22), s.61(2), Sch. 6 para. 9(3); S.I. 2013/1682, art. 3(q)F43  S. 10(3)(bd) inserted (12.7.2016) by Immigration Act 2016 (c. 19), s. 94(1), Sch. 3 para. 11(b); S.I.2016/603, reg. 3(u)F44 S. 10(3)(be) inserted (28.6.2022) by Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32), ss. 54(4) (a)(ii), 208(5)(f) (with s. 54(5)-(10))F45  Words in s. 10(3)(d) repealed (1.4.2006) by Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15),ss. 55, 174, 178, Sch. 2 para. 3(3)(c), Sch. 17 Pt. 2; S.I. 2006/378, art. 4(1), Sch. paras. 8, 12, 13(oo)(subject to art. 4(2)-(7))F46 Words in s. 10(3)(d) substituted (16.1.2012) by Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13), s. 157(1), Sch. 16 para. 278(3); S.I. 2011/3019, art. 3, Sch. 1
16	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)Part 2 – Complaints and MisconductDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesF47 S. 10(3A) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 16.4.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), ss. 27(2), 183(1)(5)(e); S.I. 2018/456, reg. 3(c)F48 Words in s. 10(3A) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 17(6); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)F49 S. 10(3B) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), ss. 28(3), 183(1)(5)(e)F50 Words in s. 10(3B) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 17(7); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)F51 Words in s. 10(4)(a) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 17(8)(a); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)F52 Words in s. 10(4)(a) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 17(8)(b); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)F53 S. 10(5A) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), ss. 34(4), 183(1)(5)(e); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)F54 Words in s. 10(6) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 17(9)(a); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)F55 Words in s. 10(6) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 17(9)(b); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)F56 Word in s. 10(7) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), ss. 34(5), 183(1)(5)(e); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)F57 Words in s. 10(7) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 17(10)(b); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)F58  Word in s. 10(7)(a) repealed (1.4.2006) by Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15),ss. 55, 174, 178, Sch. 2 para. 3(4), Sch. 17 Pt. 2; S.I. 2006/378, art. 4(1), Sch. paras. 8, 12, 13(oo)(subject to art. 4(2)-(7))F59 Words in s. 10(7) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 17(10)(a); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)F60 S. 10(7)(c) and preceding word inserted (1.4.2006) by Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15), ss. 55, 178, Sch. 2 para. 3(4); S.I. 2006/378, art. 4(1), Sch. para. 8 (subject to art. 4(2)-(7))F61  Words in s. 10(7)(c) inserted (1.4.2007) by Police and Justice Act 2006 (c. 48), ss. 1, 53, Sch. 1 para.82(4); S.I. 2007/709, art. 3(a) (subject to arts. 6, 7)F62  S. 10(8) omitted (22.11.2012) by virtue of Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13), s.157(1), Sch. 14 para. 6(a); S.I. 2012/2892, art. 2(g) (with art. 6)F63  S. 10(9) omitted (7.10.2013) by virtue of Crime and Courts Act 2013 (c. 22), s. 61(2), Sch. 6 para.9(4); S.I. 2013/1682, art. 3(q)Modifications etc. (not altering text)C28 S. 10 applied (with modifications) (E.W.) (28.12.2005) by The Revenue and Customs (Complaints and Misconduct) Regulations 2005 (S.I. 2005/3311), reg. 3(2)(6), Sch. 1C29 S. 10(7) applied (with modifications) (16.1.2012) by The Elected Local Policing Bodies (Complaints and Misconduct) Regulations 2012 (S.I. 2012/62), regs. 1, 3(5) (with reg. 3(6))
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)	17Part 2 – Complaints and MisconductDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes[F6410A General functions of the Office(1) The functions of the Office are—(a) to secure that the Office has in place appropriate arrangements for good governance and financial management,(b) to determine and promote the strategic aims and values of the Office,(c) to provide support and advice to the Director General in the carrying out of the Director General's functions, and(d) to monitor and review the carrying out of such functions.(2) The Office also has such other functions as are conferred on it by any other enactment (whenever passed or made).(3) The Office is to perform its functions for the general purpose of improving the way in which the Director General's functions are carried out (including by encouraging the efficient and effective use of resources in the carrying out of those functions).(4) In carrying out its functions the Office must in particular have regard to public confidence in the existence of suitable arrangements with respect to the matters mentioned in section 10(2) and with the operation of the arrangements that are in fact maintained with respect to those matters.(5) The Office may do anything which appears to it to be calculated to facilitate, or is incidental or conducive to, the carrying out of its functions.10B	Efficiency etc in exercise of functionsThe Director General and the Office must carry out their functions efficiently and effectively.10C	Strategy for exercise of functions(1) The Director General and the Office must jointly—(a) prepare a strategy for the carrying out of their functions, and(b) review the strategy (and revise it as appropriate) at least once every 12 months.(2) The strategy must set out how the Director General and the Office propose to carry out their functions in the relevant period.(3) The strategy must also include a plan for the use during the relevant period of resources for the carrying out of functions of the Director General and the Office.(1) 
18	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)Part 2 – Complaints and MisconductDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(4) The Director General and the Office must each give effect to the strategy in carrying out their functions.(5) The Director General and the Office must jointly publish a strategy (or revised strategy) prepared under this section (stating the time from which it takes effect).(6) In this section “relevant period”, in relation to a strategy, means the period of time that is covered by the strategy.10D	Code of practice(1) The Director General and the Office must jointly prepare a code of practice dealing with the relationship between the Director General and the Office.(2) In doing so, they must (in particular) seek to reflect the principle that the Director General is to act independently when making decisions in connection with the carrying out of the Director General's functions.(3) The code must include provision as to the following—(a) how the strategy required by section 10C is to be prepared, reviewed and revised;(b) the matters to be covered by the strategy and the periods to be covered by it from time to time;(c) how the carrying out of functions by the Director General is to be monitored and reviewed by other members of the Office;(d) the giving of advice to the Director General by other members of the Office in connection with the carrying out of functions by the Director General;(e) the keeping of written records of instances where the Director General has not followed advice given by other members of the Office and the reasons for not doing so;(f) how non-executive members of the Office are to give practical effect to the requirement imposed by subsection (2).(4) The Code may include whatever other provision the Director General and the Office think appropriate.(5) The Director General and the Office must jointly review the code regularly and revise it as appropriate.(6) The Director General and the Office must each comply with the code.(7) The Director General and the Office must jointly publish a code (or revised code) prepared under this section (stating the time from which it takes effect).](1) 
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)	19Part 2 – Complaints and MisconductDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes11 Reports to the Secretary of State(1) As soon as practicable after the end of each of [F65the Office's] financial years, the [F66Director General and the Office must jointly] make a report to the Secretary of State on the carrying out of [F67their] functions during that year.[F68(2) The Secretary of State may also require reports to be made (at any time)—(a) by the Director General about the carrying out of the Director General's functions,(b) by the Office about the carrying out of the Office's functions, or(c) jointly by the Director General and the Office about the carrying out of their functions.][F69(2A) The Director General may, from time to time, make such other reports to the Secretary of State as the Director General considers appropriate for drawing the Secretary of State's attention to matters which—(a) have come to the Director General's notice, and(b) are matters which the Director General considers should be drawn to the attention of the Secretary of State by reason of their gravity or of other exceptional circumstances.](3) The [F70Office] may, from time to time, make such other reports to the Secretary of State as it considers appropriate for drawing his attention to matters which—(a) have come to the [F71Office's] notice; and(b) are matters that it considers should be drawn to his attention by reason of their gravity or of other exceptional circumstances.[F72(3A) The Director General and the Office may jointly make reports under subsections (2A) and (3).](4) The [F73Director General] shall prepare such reports containing advice and recommendations as [F74the Director General] thinks appropriate for the purpose of carrying out—(a) [F75the Director General's] function under subsection (1)(e) of section 10; or(b) any corresponding function conferred on [F74the Director General] by virtue of subsection (1)(f) of that section.(5) Where the Secretary of State receives any report under this section, he shall—(a) in the case of every annual report under subsection (1), and(b) in the case of any other report, if and to the extent that he considers it appropriate to do so,lay a copy of the report before Parliament and cause the report to be published.(6) The [F76Office] shall send a copy of every annual report under subsection (1)—(a) to every [F77local policing body];F78(b)	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)Part 2 – Complaints and MisconductDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesF79(c)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .(d) to every authority that is maintaining a body of constables in relation to which any procedures are for the time being in force by virtue of any agreement or order under section 26 or by virtue of subsection (9) of that section[F80; andF81(e)	][F82(f)  to the National Crime Agency.][F83(6A) The Director General must send a copy of every report under subsection (2A) —(a) to any local policing body that appears to the Director General to be concerned, and(b) to the chief officer of police of any police force that appears to the Director General to be concerned.](7) The [F84Office] shall send a copy of every report under subsection (3)—(a) to any [F85local policing body] that appears to the [F84Office] to be concerned; and(b) to the chief officer of police of any police force that appears to it to be concerned.[F86(8) Where a report under subsection [F87(2A) or] (3) relates to the [F88National Crime Agency], the [F89Director General or the Office (as the case may be)] shall send a copy of that report to the Agency.](9) Where a report under subsection [F90(2A) or] (3) relates to a body of constables maintained by an authority other than a [F91local policing body], the [F92Director General or the Office (as the case may be)] shall send a copy of that report—(a) to that authority; and(b) to the person having the direction and control of that body of constables.F93(9A) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .(10) The [F94Director General] shall send a copy of every report under subsection (4)to—(a) the Secretary of State;(b) every [F95local policing body];(c) every chief officer;F96(d)	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .F97(e)	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .(f) every authority that is maintaining a body of constables in relation to which any procedures are for the time being in force by virtue of any agreement or order under section 26 or by virtue of subsection (9) of that section; F98. . .(g) every person who has the direction and control of such a body of constables[F99; F100...F101(h)	][F102; and(i) the National Crime Agency.](11) The [F103Director General] shall send a copy of every report made or prepared by [F104the Director General] under subsection [F105(2A)] or (4) to such of the persons (in addition to those specified in the preceding subsections) who—(a) are referred to in the report, or(b) appear to the [F103Director General] otherwise to have a particular interest in its contents,(a) 
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)	21Part 2 – Complaints and MisconductDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesas the [F103Director General] thinks fit.[F106(12) The Office must send a copy of every report made or prepared by it under subsection (3) to such of the persons (in addition to those specified in the preceding subsections) who—(a) are referred to in the report, or  (b) appear to the Office otherwise to have a particular interest in its contents, as the Office thinks fit.(13) Where a report under subsection (2A) or (3) is prepared jointly by virtue of subsection (3A), a duty under this section to send a copy of the report to any person is met if either the Director General or the Office sends a copy to that person.]Textual AmendmentsF65 Words in s. 11(1) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 18(2)(a); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)F66 Words in s. 11(1) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 18(2)(b); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)F67 Word in s. 11(1) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 18(2)(c); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)F68 S. 11(2) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 18(3); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)F69 S. 11(2A) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 18(4); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)F70 Word in s. 11(3) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 18(5)(a); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)F71 Word in s. 11(3) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 18(5)(b); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)F72 S. 11(3A) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 18(6); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)F73 Words in s. 11(4) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 18(7)(a); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)F74 Words in s. 11(4) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 18(7)(b); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)F75 Words in s. 11(4) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 18(7)(c); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)F76 Word in s. 11(6) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 18(8); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)
22	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)Part 2 – Complaints and MisconductDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesF77 Words in s. 11(6)(a) substituted (16.1.2012) by Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13), s. 157(1), Sch. 16 para. 279; S.I. 2011/3019, art. 3, Sch. 1F78  S. 11(6)(b) omitted (7.10.2013) by virtue of Crime and Courts Act 2013 (c. 22), s. 61(2), Sch. 6 para.10(2)(a); S.I. 2013/1682, art. 3(q)F79  S. 11(6)(c) omitted (1.4.2006) by virtue of Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15), ss.55, 178, Sch. 2 para. 4(2); S.I. 2006/378, art. 4(1), Sch. para. 8 (subject to art. 4(2)-(7))F80  S. 11(6)(e) and preceding word inserted (1.4.2007) by Police and Justice Act 2006 (c. 48), ss. 1, 53,Sch. 1 para. 83(2); S.I. 2007/709, art. 3(a) (subject to arts. 6, 7)F81  S. 11(6)(e) omitted (7.10.2013) by virtue of Crime and Courts Act 2013 (c. 22), s. 61(2), Sch. 6 para.10(2)(a); S.I. 2013/1682, art. 3(q)F82  S. 11(6)(f) inserted (7.10.2013) by Crime and Courts Act 2013 (c. 22), s. 61(2), Sch. 6 para. 10(2)(b);S.I. 2013/1682, art. 3(q)F83 S. 11(6A) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 18(9); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)F84  Word in s. 11(7) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 18(10); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)F85 Words in s. 11(7)(a) substituted (16.1.2012) by Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13), s. 157(1), Sch. 16 para. 279; S.I. 2011/3019, art. 3, Sch. 1F86  S. 11(8) substituted (1.4.2006) by Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15), ss. 55, 178,Sch. 2 para. 4(3); S.I. 2006/378, art. 4(1), Sch. para. 8 (subject to art. 4(2)-(7))F87 Words in s. 11(8) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 18(11)(a); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)F88  Words in s. 11(8) substituted (7.10.2013) by Crime and Courts Act 2013 (c. 22), s. 61(2), Sch. 6 para.10(3); S.I. 2013/1682, art. 3(q)F89 Words in s. 11(8) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 18(11)(b); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)F90 Words in s. 11(9) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 18(12)(a); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)F91  Words in s. 11(9) substituted (16.1.2012) by Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13),s. 157(1), Sch. 16 para. 279; S.I. 2011/3019, art. 3, Sch. 1F92 Words in s. 11(9) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 18(12)(b); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)F93  S. 11(9A) omitted (7.10.2013) by virtue of Crime and Courts Act 2013 (c. 22), s. 61(2), Sch. 6 para.10(4); S.I. 2013/1682, art. 3(q)F94 Words in s. 11(10) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 18(13); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)F95 Words in s. 11(10)(b) substituted (16.1.2012) by Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13), s. 157(1), Sch. 16 para. 279; S.I. 2011/3019, art. 3, Sch. 1F96  S. 11(10)(d) omitted (7.10.2013) by virtue of Crime and Courts Act 2013 (c. 22), s. 61(2), Sch. 6 para.10(5)(a); S.I. 2013/1682, art. 3(q)F97  S. 11(10)(e) omitted (1.4.2006) by virtue of Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15), ss.55, 178, Sch. 2 para. 4(4); S.I. 2006/378, art. 4(1), Sch. para. 8 (subject to art. 4(2)-(7))F98 Words in s. 11(6)(10) repealed (1.4.2007) by Police and Justice Act 2006 (c. 48), ss. 52, 53, Sch. 15 Pt. 1(A); S.I. 2007/709, art. 3(q) (subject to arts. 6, 7)F99  S. 11(10)(h) and preceding word inserted (1.4.2007) by Police and Justice Act 2006 (c. 48), ss. 1, 53,Sch. 1 para. 83(4); S.I. 2007/709, art. 3(a) (subject to arts. 6, 7)
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)	23Part 2 – Complaints and MisconductDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesApplication of Part 212 Complaints, matters and persons to which Part 2 applies[F107(1) In this Part references to a complaint are references (subject to the following provisions of this section) to any expression of dissatisfaction with a police force which is expressed (whether in writing or otherwise) by or on behalf of a member of the public.(1A) But an expression of dissatisfaction is a complaint for the purposes of this Part—(a) where it relates to conduct of a person serving with the police, only if the person in question is a person falling within subsection (1B);(b) in any other case, only if the person in question has been adversely affected by the matter about which dissatisfaction is expressed.(1B) In relation to an expression of dissatisfaction that relates to conduct of a person serving with the police, a person falls within this subsection if the person is—(a) a person who claims to be the person in relation to whom the conduct took place;(b) a person not falling within paragraph (a) who claims to have been adversely affected by the conduct; or(c) a person who claims to have witnessed the conduct.](2) In this Part “conduct matter” means (subject to the following provisions of this section, [F108section 28A and any regulations made under it,]F109... and any regulations made by virtue of section 23(2)(d)) any matter which is not and has not been the subject of a complaint but in the case of which there is an indication (whether from the circumstances or otherwise) that a person serving with the police may have—(a) committed a criminal offence; or(a) 
24	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)Part 2 – Complaints and MisconductDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(b) behaved in a manner which would justify the bringing of disciplinary proceedings.[F110(2A) In this Part “death or serious injury matter” (or “DSI matter” for short) means [F111(subject to section 28A and any regulations made under it)] any circumstances (other than those which are or have been the subject of a complaint or which amount to a conduct matter)—(a) in or in consequence of which a person has died or has sustained serious injury; and(b) in relation to which the requirements of either subsection (2B) or subsection (2C) are satisfied.(2B) The requirements of this subsection are that at the time of the death or serious injury the person—(a) had been arrested by a person serving with the police and had not been released from that arrest; or(b) was otherwise detained in the custody of a person serving with the police.(2C) The requirements of this subsection are that—(a) at or before the time of the death or serious injury the person had contact (of whatever kind, and whether direct or indirect) with a person serving with the police who was acting in the execution of his duties; and(b) there is an indication that the contact may have caused (whether directly or indirectly) or contributed to the death or serious injury.(2D) In subsection (2A) the reference to a person includes a person serving with the police, but in relation to such a person “contact” in subsection (2C) does not include contact that he has whilst acting in the execution of his duties.](3) The complaints that are complaints for the purposes of this Part by virtue of [F112subsection (1B)(b)] do not, except in a case falling within subsection (4), include any [F113where the person in question] claims to have been adversely affected as a consequence only of having seen or heard the conduct, or any of the alleged effects of the conduct.(4) A case falls within this subsection if—(a) it was only because the person in question was physically present, or sufficiently nearby, when the conduct took place or the effects occurred that he was able to see or hear the conduct or its effects; or(b) the adverse effect is attributable to, or was aggravated by, the fact that the person in relation to whom the conduct took place was already known to the person claiming to have suffered the adverse effect.[F114(4A) In this section, “the person in question” means the person expressing dissatisfaction or the person on whose behalf dissatisfaction is being expressed.](5) For the purposes of this section a person shall be taken to have witnessed conduct if, and only if—(a) he acquired his knowledge of that conduct in a manner which would make him a competent witness capable of giving admissible evidence of that conduct in criminal proceedings; or(b) he has in his possession or under his control anything which would in any such proceedings constitute admissible evidence of that conduct.(a) 
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)	25Part 2 – Complaints and MisconductDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(6) [F115For the purposes of this Part a person is not to be taken to have authorised another person to make a complaint on his behalf unless—](a) that other person is for the time being designated for the purposes of this Part by the [F116Director General] as a person through whom complaints may be made, or he is of a description of persons so designated; or(b) the other person has been given, and is able to produce, the written consent to his so acting of the person on whose behalf he acts.(7) For the purposes of this Part, a person is serving with the police if—(a) he is a member of a police force;[F117(aa)	he is a civilian employee of a police force;](b) he is an employee of [F118the Common Council of the City of London] who is under the direction and control of a chief officer; F119...(c) he is a special constable who is under the direction and control of a chief officer[F120; or(d) he is a person designated as a community support volunteer or a policing support volunteer under section 38.][F121(8) The Secretary of State may make regulations providing that, for the purposes of this Part and of any regulations made under this Part—(a) a contractor,(b) a sub-contractor of a contractor, or  (c) an employee of a contractor or a sub-contractor, is to be treated as a person serving with the police.][F121(9) Regulations under subsection (8) may make modifications to this Part, and to any regulations made under this Part, in its application to those persons.][F121(10) In subsection (8) “contractor” means a person who has entered into a contract with a local policing body or a chief officer to provide services to a chief officer.]
26	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)Part 2 – Complaints and MisconductDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesHandling of complaints [F122, conduct matters and DSI matters] etc.13 Handling of complaints[F123, conduct matters and DSI matters] etc.Schedule 3 (which makes provision for the handling of complaints[F124, conduct matters and DSI matters] and for the carrying out of investigations) shall have effectF125....
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)	27Part 2 – Complaints and MisconductDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes[F12613A Local policing bodies: functions in relation to complaints(1) The local policing body that maintains a police force may give notice to the chief officer of the police force that it (rather than the chief officer) is to exercise the functions conferred on the chief officer by the provisions specified in subsection (2) or subsections (2) and (3).(2) The provisions specified in this subsection are—(a) paragraph 2(6) to (6D) of Schedule 3, and(b) paragraph 2(9) and (10) of Schedule 3 in so far as relating to a determination made for the purposes of paragraph 2(6) to (6C) of that Schedule.(3) The provisions specified in this subsection are—(a) section 20, and(b) section 21 in so far as that section relates to complaints.(4) In relation to any complaint in respect of which the chief officer is the appropriate authority that is made on or after the day on which a notice under subsection (1) is given—(a) the functions of the chief officer to which the notice relates become functions of the local policing body,(b) references to the chief officer, including in the chief officer's capacity as an appropriate authority, in the provisions specified in subsection (2) or (as the case may be) subsections (2) and (3) are to be read as references to the local policing body, and(c) for the purpose of paragraph 6(1) of Schedule 3, the complaint is to be treated as having been recorded by the chief officer.(5) Where the notice under subsection (1) relates to the functions conferred on the chief officer by the provisions specified in subsections (2) and (3), subsection (4)(b) does not apply to the references to an appropriate authority in sections 20(2)(a) and (3A)(a) and 21(7)(a) and (8A)(a).(6) The Secretary of State may by regulations make provision in connection with the giving of notices under subsection (1) and their withdrawal.(7) Regulations under subsection (6) may (amongst other things) make provision about—(a) the steps that a local policing body must take before giving a notice;(b) the circumstances in which a notice may be withdrawn.]
28	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)Part 2 – Complaints and MisconductDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes[F12713B Power of the [F128Director General] to require re-investigation(1) This section applies where—(a) a report on an investigation of a complaint, recordable conduct matter or DSI matter carried out under the direction of the [F129Director General] has been submitted to [F130the Director General] under paragraph 22(3) or 24A of Schedule 3, or(b) a report on an investigation of a complaint, recordable conduct matter or DSI matter carried out by a person designated by the [F129Director General] has been submitted to [F130the Director General][F131(or, in the case of an investigation carried out under paragraph 19 of Schedule 3 by the Director General personally, is otherwise completed by the Director General)] under paragraph 22(5) or 24A of Schedule 3.(2) The [F129Director General] may at any time determine that the complaint, recordable conduct matter or DSI matter is to be re-investigated if [F132the Director General] is satisfied that there are compelling reasons for doing so.(3) Where the [F129Director General] makes a determination under subsection (2), [F133the Director General] must determine that the re-investigation is to take the form of an investigation by the [F129Director General] unless subsection (4) applies, in which case the [F129Director General] must determine that the re-investigation is to take the form described in that subsection.(4) This subsection applies where the [F129Director General] determines that it would be more appropriate for the re-investigation to take the form of an investigation by the appropriate authority under the direction of the [F129Director General].(5) Where—(a) the [F129Director General] determines under subsection (3) or (7) that a re- investigation is to take the form of an investigation by the [F129Director General], and(b) at any time after that the [F129Director General] determines that subsection (4) applies in relation to the re-investigation,the [F129Director General] may make a further determination under this section (to replace the earlier one) that the re-investigation is instead to take the form of an investigation by the appropriate authority under the direction of the [F129Director General].(6) Where the [F129Director General] determines under subsection (3) or (5) that a re- investigation is to take the form of an investigation by the appropriate authority under the direction of the [F129Director General], the [F129Director General] must keep under review whether subsection (4) continues to apply in relation to the re-investigation.(7) If, on such a review, the [F129Director General] Director General determines that subsection (4) no longer applies in relation to a re-investigation, the [F129Director General] must make a further determination under this section (to replace the earlier one) that the re-investigation is instead to take the form of an investigation by the [F129Director General].(8) Sub-paragraphs (6) and (7) of paragraph 15 of Schedule 3 shall apply in relation to a further determination under subsection (5) or (7) as they apply in the case of a further determination under sub-paragraph (5A) or (5B) of that paragraph.(1) 
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)	29Part 2 – Complaints and MisconductDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(9) The other provisions of Schedule 3 shall apply in relation to any re-investigation in pursuance of a determination under this section as they apply in relation to any investigation in pursuance of a determination under paragraph 15.(10) The [F129Director General] shall notify the appropriate authority of any determination that [F134the Director General] makes under this section and of [F135the Director General's] reasons for making the determination.(11) The [F129Director General] shall also notify the following of any determination that [F136the Director General] makes under this section and of [F137the Director General's] reasons for making the determination—(a) every person entitled to be kept properly informed in relation to the complaint, recordable conduct matter or DSI matter (as the case may be) under section 21;(b) where the determination is made in relation to a complaint, the complainant;(c) the person to whose conduct the re-investigation will relate.(12) The duty imposed by subsection (11) on the [F129Director General] shall have effect subject to such exceptions as may be provided for by regulations made by the Secretary of State.(13) Subsections (6) to (8) of section 20 apply for the purposes of subsection (12) as they apply for the purposes of that section.(14) In relation to a matter that was formerly a DSI matter but was recorded as a conduct matter in pursuance of paragraph 21A(5) of Schedule 3, the reference in subsection (10) to the appropriate authority is a reference to the appropriate authority in relation to the person whose conduct was in question.(15) The reference to a report in subsection (1) includes a report on a re-investigation by virtue of this section or paragraph 25 of Schedule 3.]
30	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)Part 2 – Complaints and MisconductDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesF13814	Direction and control matters. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Co-operation, assistance and information15 General duties of [F139local policing bodies], chief officers and inspectors(1) It shall be the duty of—(a) every [F140local policing body] maintaining a police force,(b) the chief officer of police of every police force, and(c) every inspector of constabulary carrying out any of his functions in relation to a police force,to ensure that it or he is kept informed, in relation to that force, about all matters falling within subsection (2).[F141(1A) It shall be the duty of the [F142National Crime Agency] to ensure that it is kept informed, in relation to the Agency, about all matters falling within subsection (2).]F143(1B) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .(2) Those matters are—(a) matters with respect to which any provision of this Part has effect;(b) anything which is done under or for the purposes of any such provision; and(c) any obligations to act or refrain from acting that have arisen by or under this Part but have not yet been complied with, or have been contravened.[F144(2A) Subsection (2B) applies in a case where it appears to a local policing body that—(a) an obligation to act or refrain from acting has arisen by or under this Part,(a) 
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)	31Part 2 – Complaints and MisconductDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(b) that obligation is an obligation of the chief officer of police of the police force which is maintained by the local policing body, and(c) the chief officer has not yet complied with that obligation, or has contravened it.(2B) The local policing body may direct the chief officer to take such steps as the local policing body thinks appropriate.(2C) The chief officer must comply with any direction given under subsection (2B).](3) Where—(a) a [F145local policing body] maintaining any police force requires the chief officer of that force or of any other force to provide a member of his force for appointment under paragraph 16F146... or 18 of Schedule 3,(b) the chief officer of police of any police force requires the chief officer of police of any other police force to provide a member of that other force for appointment under any of those paragraphs, or[F147(c) a [F148local policing body] or chief officer requires the Director General of the [F149National Crime Agency] to provide a [F150National Crime Agency officer] for appointment under any of those paragraphs,]it shall be the duty of the chief officer [F151to whom the requirement is addressed or of the Director General][F152of the Agency] to comply with it.(4) It shall be the duty of—(a) every [F153local policing body] maintaining a police force,   (b) the chief officer of police of every police force, [F154 and] [F155(c)  the [F156National Crime Agency],]to provide the [F157Director General] and every member of the [F158Office's] staff with all such assistance as the [F157Director General] or that member of staff may reasonably require for the purposes of, or in connection with, the carrying out of any investigation by the [F157Director General] under this Part [F159or any review under paragraph 25 of Schedule 3].(5) It shall be the duty of—(a) every [F160local policing body] maintaining a police force,   (b) the chief officer of every police force, [F161and] [F162(c)	the [F163National Crime Agency],]to ensure that a person appointed under paragraph 16F164... or 18 of Schedule 3 to carry out an investigation is given all such assistance and co-operation in the carrying out of that investigation as that person may reasonably require(6) The duties imposed by subsections (4) and (5) on a [F165local policing body] maintaining a police force and on the chief officer of such a force and on [F166the [F167National Crime Agency]] have effect—(a) irrespective of whether the investigation [F168or review (as the case may be)] relates to the conduct of a person who is or has been a member of that force or [F169a [F170a National Crime Agency officer]]; F171...(b) [F172in the case of an investigation,] irrespective of who has the person appointed to carry out the investigation under his direction and control; [F173and(a) 
32	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)Part 2 – Complaints and MisconductDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(c) in the case of a review applied for under paragraph 25(1B) of Schedule 3 in respect of an investigation, irrespective of who had the person appointed to carry out the investigation under his direction and control;]but a chief officer of a third force may be required to give assistance and co-operation under subsection (5) only with the approval of the chief officer of the force to which the person who requires it belongs F174. . . .(7) In subsection (6) “third force”, in relation to an investigation, means a police force other than—(a) the force to which the person carrying out the investigation belongs; or(b) the force to which the person whose conduct is under investigation belonged at the time of the conduct;[F175 and where the person whose conduct is under investigation was a [F176National Crime Agency officer] at the time of the conduct, “third force” means any police force other than the force to which the person carrying out the investigation belongs.][F177(8) Where the person who requires assistance and co-operation under subsection (5) is a [F178National Crime Agency officer], a chief officer of a third force may be required to give that assistance and co-operation only with the approval of the Director General of the Agency.F179(8A) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .[F180(8B) In subsections (8) and (8A) “third force”, in relation to an investigation, means any police force other than the force to which the person whose conduct is under investigation belonged at the time of the conduct.](9) Where—(a) the person carrying out an investigation is not a [F181National Crime Agency officer]; and(b) the person whose conduct is under investigation was not a [F182National Crime Agency officer] at the time of the conduct,[F183the Agency may be required to give assistance and co-operation under subsection (5) only with the approval of the relevant directing officer.]][F184(10) In subsection (9) “the relevant directing officer”—(a) in a case where the person who requires assistance and co-operation belongs to a police force, means the chief officer of that force; F185...F186(b)	]
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)	33Part 2 – Complaints and MisconductDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesF144 S. 15(2A)-(2C) inserted (16.1.2012 for specified purposes, 22.11.2012 in so far as not already in force) by Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13), s. 157(1), Sch. 14 para. 7; S.I. 2011/3019, art. 3, Sch. 1; S.I. 2012/2892, art. 2(g) (with art. 6)F145 Words in s. 15(3)(a) substituted (16.1.2012) by Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13), s. 157(1), Sch. 16 para. 281(3); S.I. 2011/3019, art. 3, Sch. 1F146 Word in s. 15(3)(a) omitted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by virtue of Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 47(a)(i); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))F147 S. 15(3)(c) substituted (1.4.2006) by Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15), ss. 55, 178,Sch. 2 para. 5(3)(a); S.I. 2006/378, art. 4(1), Sch. para. 8 (subject to art. 4(2)-(7))F148 Words in s. 15(3)(c) substituted (16.1.2012) by Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13), s. 157(1), Sch. 16 para. 281(4); S.I. 2011/3019, art. 3, Sch. 1F149 Words in s. 15(3)(c) substituted (7.10.2013) by Crime and Courts Act 2013 (c. 22), s. 61(2), Sch. 6 para. 11(4)(a); S.I. 2013/1682, art. 3(q)F150 Words in s. 15(3)(c) substituted (7.10.2013) by Crime and Courts Act 2013 (c. 22), s. 61(2), Sch. 6 para. 11(4)(b); S.I. 2013/1682, art. 3(q)F151 Words in s. 15(3) substituted (1.4.2006) by Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15), ss.55, 178, Sch. 2 para. 5(3)(b); S.I. 2006/378, art. 4(1), Sch. para. 8 (subject to art. 4(2)-(7))F152 Words in s. 15(3) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 21(2); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)F153 Words in s. 15(4)(a) substituted (16.1.2012) by Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13), s. 157(1), Sch. 16 para. 281(5); S.I. 2011/3019, art. 3, Sch. 1F154 Word in s. 15(4)(b) inserted (1.4.2006) by Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15), ss.55, 178, Sch. 2 para. 5(4); S.I. 2006/378, art. 4(1), Sch. para. 8 (subject to art. 4(2)-(7))F155 S. 15(4)(c) substituted for s. 15(4)(c)(d) (1.4.2006) by Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15), ss. 55, 178, Sch. 2 para. 5(4); S.I. 2006/378, art. 4(1), Sch. para. 8 (subject to art. 4(2)-(7))F156 Words in s. 15(4)(c) substituted (7.10.2013) by Crime and Courts Act 2013 (c. 22), s. 61(2), Sch. 6 para. 11(5); S.I. 2013/1682, art. 3(q)F157 Words in s. 15(4) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 21(3)(a); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)F158 Word in s. 15(4) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 21(3)(b); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)F159 Words in s. 15(4) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 42(a); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))F160 Words in s. 15(5)(a) substituted (16.1.2012) by Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13), s. 157(1), Sch. 16 para. 281(5); S.I. 2011/3019, art. 3, Sch. 1F161 Word in s. 15(5)(b) inserted (1.4.2006) by Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15), ss.55, 178, Sch. 2 para. 5(5); S.I. 2006/378, art. 4(1), Sch. para. 8 (subject to art. 4(2)-(7))F162 S. 15(5)(c) substituted for s. 15(5)(c)(d) (1.4.2006) by Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15), ss. 55, 178, Sch. 2 para. 5(5); S.I. 2006/378, art. 4(1), Sch. para. 8 (subject to art. 4(2)-(7))F163 Words in s. 15(5)(c) substituted (7.10.2013) by Crime and Courts Act 2013 (c. 22), s. 61(2), Sch. 6 para. 11(5); S.I. 2013/1682, art. 3(q)F164 Word in s. 15(5) omitted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by virtue of Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 47(a)(ii); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))F165 Words in s. 15(6) substituted (16.1.2012) by Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13),s. 157(1), Sch. 16 para. 281(5); S.I. 2011/3019, art. 3, Sch. 1F166 Words in s. 15(6) substituted (1.4.2006) by Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15), ss.55, 178, Sch. 2 para. 5(6)(a); S.I. 2006/378, art. 4(1), Sch. para. 8 (subject to art. 4(2)-(7))
34	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)Part 2 – Complaints and MisconductDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesF167 Words in s. 15(6) substituted (7.10.2013) by Crime and Courts Act 2013 (c. 22), s. 61(2), Sch. 6 para.11(6)(a); S.I. 2013/1682, art. 3(q)F168 Words in s. 15(6)(a) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 42(b)(i); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))F169 Words in s. 15(6)(a) substituted (1.4.2006) by Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15),ss. 55, 178, Sch. 2 para. 5(6)(b); S.I. 2006/378, art. 4(1), Sch. para. 8 (subject to art. 4(2)-(7))F170 Words in s. 15(6)(a) substituted (7.10.2013) by Crime and Courts Act 2013 (c. 22), s. 61(2), Sch. 6 para. 11(6)(b); S.I. 2013/1682, art. 3(q)F171 Word in s. 15(6)(a) omitted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by virtue of Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 42(b)(ii); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))F172 Words in s. 15(6)(b) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 42(b)(iii); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))F173 S. 15(6)(c) and word inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 42(b)(iv); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))F174 Words in s. 15(6) repealed (1.4.2006) by Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15), ss. 55, 174, 178, Sch. 2 para. 5(6)(c), Sch. 17 Pt. 2; S.I. 2006/378, art. 4(1), Sch. paras. 8, 12, 13(oo) (subjectto art. 4(2)-(7))F175 Words in s. 15(7) substituted (1.4.2006) by Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15), ss.55, 178, Sch. 2 para. 5(7); S.I. 2006/378, art. 4(1), Sch. para. 8 (subject to art. 4(2)-(7))F176 Words in s. 15(7) substituted (7.10.2013) by Crime and Courts Act 2013 (c. 22), s. 61(2), Sch. 6 para.11(7); S.I. 2013/1682, art. 3(q)F177 S. 15(8)(9) inserted (1.4.2006) by Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15), ss. 55, 178,Sch. 2 para. 5(8); S.I. 2006/378, art. 4(1), Sch. para. 8 (subject to art. 4(2)-(7))F178 Words in s. 15(8) substituted (7.10.2013) by Crime and Courts Act 2013 (c. 22), s. 61(2), Sch. 6 para.11(8); S.I. 2013/1682, art. 3(q)F179 S. 15(8A) omitted (7.10.2013) by virtue of Crime and Courts Act 2013 (c. 22), s. 61(2), Sch. 6 para.11(9); S.I. 2013/1682, art. 3(q)F180 S. 15(8A)(8B) substituted for words in s. 15(8) (1.4.2007) by Police and Justice Act 2006 (c. 48), ss. 1, 53, Sch. 1 para. 84(3); S.I. 2007/709, art. 3(a) (subject to arts. 6, 7)F181 Words in s. 15(9)(a) substituted (7.10.2013) by Crime and Courts Act 2013 (c. 22), s. 61(2), Sch. 6 para. 11(10)(a); S.I. 2013/1682, art. 3(q)F182 Words in s. 15(9)(b) substituted (7.10.2013) by Crime and Courts Act 2013 (c. 22), s. 61(2), Sch. 6 para. 11(10)(b); S.I. 2013/1682, art. 3(q)F183 Words in s. 15(9) substituted (1.4.2007) by Police and Justice Act 2006 (c. 48), ss. 1, 53, Sch. 1 para.84(4); S.I. 2007/709, art. 3(a) (subject to arts. 6, 7)F184 S. 15(10) inserted (1.4.2007) by Police and Justice Act 2006 (c. 48), ss. 1, 53, Sch. 1 para. 84(5); S.I.2007/709, art. 3(a) (subject to arts. 6, 7)F185 Word in s. 15(10)(a) omitted (7.10.2013) by virtue of Crime and Courts Act 2013 (c. 22), s. 61(2), Sch.6 para. 11(11); S.I. 2013/1682, art. 3(q)F186 S. 15(10)(b) omitted (7.10.2013) by virtue of Crime and Courts Act 2013 (c. 22), s. 61(2), Sch. 6 para.11(11); S.I. 2013/1682, art. 3(q)Modifications etc. (not altering text)C33 S. 15 applied (with modifications) (E.W.) (28.12.2005) by The Revenue and Customs (Complaints and Misconduct) Regulations 2005 (S.I. 2005/3311), reg. 3(2)(6), Sch. 1
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)	35Part 2 – Complaints and MisconductDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes16 Payment for assistance with investigations(1) This section applies where—(a) one police force is required to provide assistance to another in connection with an investigation under this Part; or(b) a police force is required to provide assistance [F187to the [F188Director General] in connection with an investigation under this Part or a review under paragraph 25 of Schedule 3].(2) For the purposes of this section—(a) assistance is required to be provided by one police force to another in connection with an investigation under this Part if the chief officer of the first force (“the assisting force”) complies with a requirement under section 15 (3) or (5) that is made in connection with[F189(ai) an investigation of a complaint where the complainant expressed dissatisfaction with the other force,][F190(i) an investigation [F191of a recordable conduct matter] relating to the conduct of a person who, at the time of the conduct, was a member of the other force, or(ii) an investigation of a DSI matter in relation to which the relevant officer was, at the time of the death or serious injury, a member of the other force; and](b) assistance is required to be provided [F192by a police force (“the assisting force”) to the [F188Director General] in connection with an investigation under this Part or a review under paragraph 25 of Schedule 3] if the chief officer of that force complies with a requirement under section 15(4) that is made in connection with[F193(ai) an investigation of a complaint where the complainant expressed dissatisfaction with a force other than that force,][F194(i) an investigation [F195of a recordable conduct matter] relating to the conduct of a person who, at the time of the conduct, was not a member of that force, F196...(ii) an investigation of a DSI matter in relation to which the relevant officer was, at the time of the death or serious injury, not a member of that force][F197, or(iii) a review under paragraph 25 of Schedule 3 of the outcome of a complaint where the complainant expressed dissatisfaction with a force other than that force.](3) Where the assistance is required to be provided by one police force to another, the [F198local policing body] maintaining that other police force shall pay to the [F198local policing body] maintaining the assisting force such contribution (if any) towards the costs of the assistance—(a) as may be agreed between them; or(b) in the absence of an agreement, as may be determined in accordance with any arrangements which—(i) have been agreed to by [F199local policing bodies] generally; and(ii) are for the time being in force with respect to the making of contributions towards the costs of assistance provided, in connection with investigations under this Part, by one police force to another; or(i) 
36	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)Part 2 – Complaints and MisconductDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(c) in the absence of any such arrangements, as may be determined by the Secretary of State.(4) Where the assistance is required to be provided by a police force to the [F188Director General], [F200Office] shall pay to the [F201local policing body] maintaining the assisting force such contribution (if any) towards the costs of the assistance—(a) as may be agreed between the [F188Director General] and [F202that body]; or(b) in the absence of an agreement, as may be determined in accordance with any arrangements which—(i) have been agreed to by [F203local policing bodies] generally and by the [F188Director General]; and(ii) are for the time being in force with respect to the making of contributions towards the costs of assistance provided, in connection with investigations under this Part, to the [F188Director General]; or(c) in the absence of any such arrangements, as may be determined by the Secretary of State.[F204(5) In this section (subject to subsection (6))—(a) references to a police force and to a [F205local policing body] maintaining a police force include references to the [F206National Crime Agency]; and(b) in relation to that Agency, references to the chief officer are references to the Director General [F207of that Agency].(6) This section shall have effect in relation to cases in which assistance is required to be provided by the [F208National Crime Agency] as if—(a) the reference in subsection (3)(b) to [F209local policing bodies] generally included a reference to the Agency; and(b) the reference in subsection (4)(b) to [F209local policing bodies] generally were a reference to the Agency.](7) This section is without prejudice to the application of section 24 of the 1996 Act (assistance given voluntarily by one force to another) in a case in which assistance is provided, otherwise than in pursuance of any duty imposed by section 15 of this Act, in connection with an investigation under this Part.
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)	37Part 2 – Complaints and MisconductDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesF192 Words in s. 16(2)(b) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 43(b)(i); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))F193 S. 16(2)(b)(ai) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 4 para. 3(3)(a); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(m) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))F194 S. 16(2)(b)(i)(ii) substituted for words (1.7.2005) by Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15), ss. 160, 178, Sch. 12 para. 5(3); S.I. 2005/1521, art. 3(1)(w)F195 Words in s. 16(2)(b)(i) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 4 para. 3(3)(b); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(m) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))F196 Word in s. 16(2)(b)(i) omitted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by virtue of Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 43(b)(ii); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))F197 S. 16(2)(b)(iii) and word inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 43(b)(iii); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))F198 Words in s. 16(3) substituted (16.1.2012) by Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13),s. 157(1), Sch. 16 para. 282(2)(a); S.I. 2011/3019, art. 3, Sch. 1F199 Words in s. 16(3)(b)(i) substituted (16.1.2012) by Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13), s. 157(1), Sch. 16 para. 282(2)(b); S.I. 2011/3019, art. 3, Sch. 1F200 Word in s. 16(4) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 22(3); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)F201 Words in s. 16(4) substituted (16.1.2012) by Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13),s. 157(1), Sch. 16 para. 282(3)(a); S.I. 2011/3019, art. 3, Sch. 1F202 Words in s. 16(4)(a) substituted (16.1.2012) by Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13), s. 157(1), Sch. 16 para. 282(3)(b); S.I. 2011/3019, art. 3, Sch. 1F203 Words in s. 16(4)(b)(i) substituted (16.1.2012) by Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13), s. 157(1), Sch. 16 para. 282(3)(c); S.I. 2011/3019, art. 3, Sch. 1F204 S. 16(5)(6) substituted (1.4.2006) by Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15), ss. 55, 178,Sch. 2 para. 6; S.I. 2006/378, art. 4(1), Sch. para. 8 (subject to art. 4(2)-(7))F205 Words in s. 16(5) substituted (16.1.2012) by Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13),s. 157(1), Sch. 16 para. 282(4); S.I. 2011/3019, art. 3, Sch. 1F206 Words in s. 16(5)(a) substituted (7.10.2013) by Crime and Courts Act 2013 (c. 22), s. 61(2), Sch. 6 para. 12(2); S.I. 2013/1682, art. 3(q)F207 Words in s. 16(5)(b) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 22(4); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)F208 Words in s. 16(6) substituted (7.10.2013) by Crime and Courts Act 2013 (c. 22), s. 61(2), Sch. 6 para.12(3); S.I. 2013/1682, art. 3(q)F209 Words in s. 16(6) substituted (16.1.2012) by Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13),s. 157(1), Sch. 16 para. 282(5); S.I. 2011/3019, art. 3, Sch. 1Modifications etc. (not altering text)C34 S. 16 applied (with modifications) (E.W.) (28.12.2005) by The Revenue and Customs (Complaints and Misconduct) Regulations 2005 (S.I. 2005/3311), reg. 3(2)(6), Sch. 1F21016A Investigations: National Policing Improvement Agency involvement. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)Part 2 – Complaints and MisconductDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes17 Provision of information to the [F211Director General](1) It shall be the duty of—(a) every [F212local policing body], and(b) every chief officer,at such times, in such circumstances and in accordance with such other requirements as may be set out in regulations made by the Secretary of State, to provide the [F211Director General] with all such information and documents as may be specified or described in regulations so made.(2) It shall also be the duty of every [F213local policing body] and of every chief officer—(a) to provide the [F211Director General] with all such other information and documents specified or described in a notification given by the [F211Director General] to [F214that body] or chief officer, and(b) to produce or deliver up to the [F211Director General] all such evidence and other things so specified or described,as appear to the [F211Director General] to be required by [F215the Director General] for the purposes of the carrying out of any of [F216the Director General's] functions.(3) Anything falling to be provided, produced or delivered up by any person in pursuance of a requirement imposed under subsection (2) must be provided, produced or delivered up in such form, in such manner and within such period as may be specified in—(a) the notification imposing the requirement; or(b) in any subsequent notification given by the [F211Director General] to that person for the purposes of this subsection.(4) Nothing in this section shall require a [F217local policing body] or chief officer—(a) to provide the [F211Director General] with any information or document, or to produce or deliver up any other thing, before the earliest time at which it is practicable for [F218that body] or chief officer to do so; or(b) to provide, produce or deliver up anything at all in a case in which it never becomes practicable for [F218that body] or chief officer to do so.(5) A requirement imposed by any regulations or notification under this section may authorise or require information or documents to which it relates to be provided to the [F211Director General] electronically.F219(6) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)	39Part 2 – Complaints and MisconductDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes18 Inspections of police premises on behalf of the [F220Director General](1) Where—(a) the [F220Director General] requires—(i) a [F221local policing body] maintaining any police force, or(ii) the chief officer of police of any such force,to allow a person nominated for the purpose by the [F220Director General] to have access to any premises occupied for the purposes of that force and to documents and other things on those premises, and(b) the requirement is imposed for any of the purposes mentioned in subsection (2),it shall be the duty of [F222the body] or, as the case may be, of the chief officer to secure that the required access is allowed to the nominated person.(2) Those purposes are—(a) the purposes of any examination by the [F220Director General] of the efficiency and effectiveness of the arrangements made by the force in question for handling complaints or dealing with recordable conduct matters [F223or DSI matters];(b) the purposes of any investigation by the [F220Director General] under this Part or of any investigation carried out under [F224the Director General's]F225... [F226direction].(a) 
40	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)Part 2 – Complaints and MisconductDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes[F227(c)	the purposes of any review by the [F220Director General] under paragraph 25 of Schedule 3.](3) A requirement imposed under this section for the purposes mentioned in subsection (2)(a) must be notified to [F228the body] or chief officer at least 48 hours before the time at which access is required.(4) Where—(a) a requirement imposed under this section for the purposes mentioned in subsection (2)(a) requires access to any premises, document or thing to be allowed to any person, but(b) there are reasonable grounds for not allowing that person to have the required access at the time at which he seeks to have it,the obligation to secure that the required access is allowed shall have effect as an obligation to secure that the access is allowed to that person at the earliest practicable time after there cease to be any such grounds as that person may specify.(5) The provisions of this section are in addition to, and without prejudice to—(a) the rights of entry, search and seizure that are or may be conferred on—(i) a person designated for the purposes of paragraph 19 of Schedule 3, or(ii) any person who otherwise acts on behalf of the [F220Director General],in his capacity as a constable or as a person with the powers and privileges of a constable; or(b) the obligations of [F229local policing bodies] and chief officers under sections 15 and 17.
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)	41Part 2 – Complaints and MisconductDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes19 Use of investigatory powers by or on behalf of the [F230Director General](1) The Secretary of State may by order make such provision as he thinks appropriate for the purpose of authorising—(a) the use of directed and intrusive surveillance, and(b) the conduct and use of covert human intelligence sources,for the purposes of, or for purposes connected with, the carrying out of the [F231Director General's] functions.(2) An order under this section may, for the purposes of or in connection with any such provision as is mentioned in subsection (1), provide for—(a) Parts 2 and 4 the Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act 2000 (c. 23) (surveillance and covert human intelligence sources and scrutiny of investigatory powers), and  (b) Part 3 of the 1997 Act (authorisations in respect of property), to have effect with such modifications as may be specified in the order.(3) The Secretary of State shall not make an order containing (with or without any other provision) any provision authorised by this section unless a draft of that order has been laid before Parliament and approved by a resolution of each House.(4) Expressions used in this section and in Part 2 of the Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act 2000 have the same meanings in this section as in that Part.[F232(5) But the reference in subsection (1)(b) to the conduct of covert human intelligence sources does not include conduct which may be authorised under section 29B of that Act (criminal conduct authorisations).]
42	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)Part 2 – Complaints and MisconductDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes20 Duty to keep the complainant informed(1) In any case in which there is an investigation of a complaint in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 3—(a) by the [F233Director General], or(b) under [F234the Director General's][F235direction],it shall be the duty of the [F233Director General] to provide the complainant with all such information as will keep him properly informed, while the investigation is being carried out and subsequently, of all the matters mentioned in subsection (4).(2) In any case in which there is an investigation of a complaint in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 3—   (a) by the appropriate authority on its own behalf, F236... F237(b)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .it shall be the duty of the appropriate authority to provide the complainant with all such information as will keep him properly informed, while the investigation is being carried out and subsequently, of all the matters mentioned in subsection (4).(3) Where subsection (2) applies, it shall be the duty of the [F233Director General] to give the appropriate authority all such directions as [F238the Director General] considers appropriate for securing that that authority complies with its duty under that subsection; and it shall be the duty of the appropriate authority to comply with any direction given to it under this subsection.[F239(3A) In any case in which a complaint is being handled—(a) in accordance with paragraph 6(2A) of Schedule 3 otherwise than by the appropriate authority making arrangements for the complaint to be investigated by the authority on its own behalf, or(b) otherwise than in accordance with Schedule 3 (as to which see paragraph 2(6C) of that Schedule),it shall be the duty of the appropriate authority to provide the complainant with all such information as will keep him properly informed, while the complaint is being handled and subsequently, of all the matters mentioned in subsection (4).][F240(4) The matters of which the complainant must be kept properly informed are—(a) the progress of the handling of the complaint;(b) the outcome of the handling of the complaint;(c) any right to apply for a review conferred on the complainant by paragraph 6A or 25 of Schedule 3 (as the case may be);(d) such other matters as may be specified in regulations made by the Secretary of State.(a) 
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)	43Part 2 – Complaints and MisconductDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(4A) The generality of subsection (4)(a) and (b) is not affected by any requirement to notify the complainant that is imposed by any other provision of this Part.](5) The duties imposed by this section on the [F233Director General] and the appropriate authority in relation to any complaint shall be performed in such manner, and shall have effect subject to such exceptions, as may be provided for by regulations made by the Secretary of State.(6) The Secretary of State shall not by regulations provide for any exceptions from the duties imposed by this section except so far as he considers it necessary to do so for the purpose of—(a) preventing the premature or inappropriate disclosure of information that is relevant to, or may be used in, any actual or prospective criminal proceedings;(b) preventing the disclosure of information in any circumstances in which it has been determined in accordance with the regulations that its non-disclosure—(i) is in the interests of national security;(ii) is for the purposes of the prevention or detection of crime, or the apprehension or prosecution of offenders;(iii) is required on proportionality grounds; or(iv) is otherwise necessary in the public interest.(7) The non-disclosure of information is required on proportionality grounds if its disclosure would cause, directly or indirectly, an adverse effect which would be disproportionate to the benefits arising from its disclosure.(8) Regulations under this section may include provision framed by reference to the opinion of, or a determination by, the [F233Director General] or any [F241local policing body] or chief officer.[F242(8A) In any case in which there is an investigation of a complaint, the [F233Director General] or the appropriate authority may comply with [F243their] duty under subsection (1) or(2) (as the case may be) so far as relating to the findings of a report submitted [F244(or finalised)] under provision made by virtue of paragraph 20A(4)(b) of Schedule 3, or a report of the investigation submitted [F245(or completed)] under paragraph 22 of Schedule 3, by sending the complainant a copy of the report.(8B) Subsection (8A) applies notwithstanding any obligation of secrecy imposed by any rule of law or otherwise but is subject to—(a) regulations made under subsection (5), and(b) section 21A.](9) It shall be the duty of a person appointed to carry out an investigation under this Part [F246, or who is otherwise involved in the handling of a complaint under this Part,] to provide the [F233Director General] or, as the case may be, the appropriate authority with all such information as the [F233Director General] or that authority may reasonably require for the purpose of performing [F247their] duty under this section.
44	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)Part 2 – Complaints and MisconductDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesF234 Words in s. 20(1)(b) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 26(3); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)F235 Word in s. 20(1)(b) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 47(c)(i); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))F236 Word in s. 20(2)(a) omitted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by virtue of Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 47(c)(ii); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))F237 S. 20(2)(b) omitted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by virtue of Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 47(c)(ii); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))F238 Words in s. 20(3) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 26(4); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)F239 S. 20(3A) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), ss. 15(2), 183(1)(5)(e)(5)(e); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(c) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))F240 S. 20(4)(4A) substituted for s. 20(4) (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), ss. 15(3), 183(1)(5)(e); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(c) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))F241 Words in s. 20(8) substituted (16.1.2012) by Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13),s. 157(1), Sch. 16 para. 286; S.I. 2011/3019, art. 3, Sch. 1F242 S. 20(8A)(8B) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), ss. 15(4), 183(1)(5)(e); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(c) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))F243 Word in s. 20(8A) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 26(5)(a); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)F244 Words in s. 20(8A) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 26(5)(b); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)F245 Words in s. 20(8A) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 26(5)(c); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)F246 Words in s. 20(9) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), ss. 15(5), 183(1)(5)(e); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(c) (with art. 3(1)(2) (4))F247 Word in s. 20(9) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 26(6); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)Modifications etc. (not altering text)C43 S. 20 applied (with modifications) (28.12.2005) by The Revenue and Customs (Complaints and Misconduct) Regulations 2005 (S.I. 2005/3311), reg. 3(2)(6), Sch. 1Commencement InformationI4  S. 20 wholly in force at 1.4.2004; s. 20 not in force at Royal Assent, see s. 108(2); s. 20(5)-(8) in force for certain purposes at 1.10.2002 by S.I. 2002/2306, art. 4(b); s. 20 in force in so far as not already in force at 1.4.2004 by S.I. 2004/913, art. 2(a)
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)	45Part 2 – Complaints and MisconductDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes21 Duty to provide information for other persons(1) A person has an interest in being kept properly informed about the handling of a complaint [F248, recordable conduct matter or DSI matter] if—(a) it appears to the [F249Director General] or to an appropriate authority that he is a person falling within subsection (2) [F250or (2A)]; and(b) that person has indicated that he consents to the provision of information to him in accordance with this section and that consent has not been withdrawn.(2) A person falls within this subsection if [F251(in the case of a [F252complaint that relates to conduct of a person serving with the police or a] recordable conduct matter)]—(a) he is a relative of a person whose death is the alleged result from the conduct complained of or to which the recordable conduct matter relates;(b) he is a relative of a person whose serious injury is the alleged result from that conduct and that person is incapable of making a complaint;(c) he himself has suffered serious injury as the alleged result of that conduct.[F253(2A) A person falls within this subsection if (in the case of a DSI matter)—(a) he is a relative of the person who has died;(b) he is a relative of the person who has suffered serious injury and that person is incapable of making a complaint;(c) he himself is the person who has suffered serious injury.](3) A person who does not fall within subsection (2) [F254or (2A)] has an interest in being kept properly informed about the handling of a complaint [F255, recordable conduct matter or DSI matter] if—(a) the [F249Director General] or an appropriate authority considers that he has an interest in the handling of the complaint [F255, recordable conduct matter or DSI matter] which is sufficient to make it appropriate for information to be provided to him in accordance with this section; and(b) he has indicated that he consents to the provision of information to him in accordance with this section.(4) In relation to a complaint, this section confers no rights on the complainant.(5) A person who has an interest in being kept properly informed about the handling of a complaint [F256, conduct matter or DSI matter] is referred to in this section as an “interested person”.(6) In any case in which there is an investigation of the complaint [F257, recordable conduct matter or DSI matter] in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 3—(a) by the [F249Director General], or(b) under [F258the Director General's][F259direction],it shall be the duty of the [F249Director General] to provide the interested person with all such information as will keep him properly informed, while the investigation is being carried out and subsequently, of all the matters mentioned in subsection (9).(7) In any case in which there is an investigation of the complaint [F257, recordable conduct matter or DSI matter] in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 3—   (a) by the appropriate authority on its own behalf, F260... F261(b)	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   (a) 
46	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)Part 2 – Complaints and MisconductDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesit shall be the duty of the appropriate authority to provide the interested person with all such information as will keep him properly informed, while the investigation is being carried out and subsequently, of all the matters mentioned in subsection (9).(8) Where subsection (7) applies, it shall be the duty of the [F249Director General] to give the appropriate authority all such directions as [F262the Director General] considers appropriate for securing that that authority complies with its duty under that subsection; and it shall be the duty of the appropriate authority to comply with any direction given to it under this subsection.[F263(8A) In any case in which—(a) the complaint is being handled in accordance with paragraph 6(2A) of Schedule 3 otherwise than by the appropriate authority making arrangements for the complaint to be investigated by the authority on its own behalf, or(b) the recordable conduct matter or DSI matter is being handled in a manner determined by the appropriate authority in accordance with paragraph 10(4D), 11(3E), 14(2) or 14D(2) of Schedule 3 otherwise than by the appropriate authority making arrangements for the matter to be investigated by the authority on its own behalf,it shall be the duty of the appropriate authority to provide the interested person with all such information as will keep him properly informed, while the complaint, recordable conduct matter or DSI matter is being handled and subsequently, of all the matters mentioned in subsection (9).][F264(9) The matters of which the interested person must be kept properly informed are—(a) the progress of the handling of the complaint, recordable conduct matter or DSI matter;(b) the outcome of the handling of the complaint, recordable conduct matter or DSI matter;(c) such other matters as may be specified in regulations made by the Secretary of State.(9A) The generality of subsection (9)(a) and (b) is not affected by any requirement to notify an interested person that is imposed by any other provision of this Part.](10) The duties imposed by this section on the [F249Director General] and the appropriate authority in relation to any complaint [F265, recordable conduct matter or DSI matter] shall be performed in such manner, and shall have effect subject to such exceptions, as may be provided for by regulations made by the Secretary of State.(11) Subsections (6) to (9) of section 20 apply for the purposes of this section as they apply for the purposes of that section.[F266(11A) In any case in which there is an investigation of a complaint, recordable conduct matter or DSI matter, the [F249Director General] or the appropriate authority may comply with [F267their] duty under subsection (6) or (7) (as the case may be) so far as relating to the findings of a report submitted [F268(or finalised)] under provision made by virtue of paragraph 20A(4)(b) of Schedule 3, or a report of the investigation submitted [F269(or completed)] under paragraph 22 or 24A of Schedule 3, by sending an interested person a copy of the report.(11B) Subsection (11A) applies notwithstanding any obligation of secrecy imposed by any rule of law or otherwise but is subject to—(a) regulations made under subsection (10), and(a) 
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)	47Part 2 – Complaints and MisconductDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(b) section 21A.](12) In this section “relative” means a person of a description prescribed in regulations made by the Secretary of State.Textual AmendmentsF248 Words in s. 21(1) substituted (1.7.2005) by Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15), ss.160, 178, Sch. 12 para. 7(2); S.I. 2005/1521, art. 3(1)(w)F249 Words in s. 21 substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 27(2); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)F250 Words in s. 21(1)(a) inserted (1.7.2005) by Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15), ss.160, 178, Sch. 12 para. 7(3); S.I. 2005/1521, art. 3(1)(w)F251 Words in s. 21(2) inserted (1.7.2005) by Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15), ss. 160, 178, Sch. 12 para. 7(4); S.I. 2005/1521, art. 3(1)(w)F252 Words in s. 21(2) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 4 para. 4; S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(m) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))F253 S. 21(2A) inserted (1.7.2005) by Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15), ss. 160, 178,Sch. 12 para. 7(5); S.I. 2005/1521, art. 3(1)(w)F254 Words in s. 21(3) inserted (1.7.2005) by Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15), ss. 160, 178, Sch. 12 para. 7(6)(a); S.I. 2005/1521, art. 3(1)(w)F255 Words in s. 21(3) substituted (1.7.2005) by Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15), ss.160, 178, Sch. 12 para. 7(6)(b); S.I. 2005/1521, art. 3(1)(w)F256 Words in s. 21(5) substituted (1.7.2005) by Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15), ss.160, 178, Sch. 12 para. 7(7); S.I. 2005/1521, art. 3(1)(w)F257 Words in s. 21(6)(7) substituted (1.7.2005) by Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15),ss. 160, 178, Sch. 12 para. 7(8); S.I. 2005/1521, art. 3(1)(w)F258 Words in s. 21(6)(b) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 27(3); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)F259 Word in s. 21(6)(b) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 47(d)(i); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))F260 Word in s. 21(7)(a) omitted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by virtue of Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 47(d)(ii); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))F261 S. 21(7)(b) omitted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by virtue of Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 47(d)(ii); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))F262 Words in s. 21(8) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 27(4); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)F263 S. 21(8A) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), ss. 15(6), 183(1)(5)(e); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(c) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))F264 S. 21(9)(9A) substituted for s. 21(9) (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), ss. 15(7), 183(1)(5)(e); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(c) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))F265 Words in s. 21(10) substituted (1.7.2005) by Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15), ss.160, 178, Sch. 12 para. 7(11); S.I. 2005/1521, art. 3(1)(w)
48	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)Part 2 – Complaints and MisconductDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes[F27021A Restriction on disclosure of sensitive information(1) Where the [F271Director General] receives information within subsection (3), the [F271Director General] must not disclose (whether under section 11, 20 or 21 or otherwise) the information, or the fact that it has been received, unless the relevant authority consents to the disclosure.(2) Where a person appointed under paragraph 18 of Schedule 3 to investigate a complaint or matter (a “paragraph 18 investigator”) receives information within subsection (3), the paragraph 18 investigator must not disclose the information, or the fact that it has been received, to any person other than the [F271Director General] unless the relevant authority consents to the disclosure.(3) The information is—(a) intelligence service information;(b) protected information relating to a relevant warrant;(c) information obtained from a government department which, at the time it is provided to the [F271Director General] or the paragraph 18 investigator, is identified by the department as information the disclosure of which may, in the opinion of the relevant authority—(i) cause damage to national security, international relations or the economic interests of the United Kingdom or any part of the United Kingdom, or(ii) jeopardise the safety of any person.(4) Where the [F271Director General] or a paragraph 18 investigator discloses to another person information within subsection (3), or the fact that the [F271Director General] or the paragraph 18 investigator has received it, the other person must not disclose that information or that fact unless the relevant authority consents to the disclosure.(1) 
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)	49Part 2 – Complaints and MisconductDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(5) In this section—  “government department” means a department of Her Majesty's Government but does not include—(a) the Security Service,(b) the Secret Intelligence Service, or(c) the Government Communications Headquarters (“GCHQ”); “intelligence service information” means information that was obtained(directly or indirectly) from or that relates to—(a) the Security Service,(b) the Secret Intelligence Service,(c) GCHQ, or(d) any part of Her Majesty's forces, or of the Ministry of Defence, which engages in intelligence activities;“Minister of the Crown” includes the Treasury;“paragraph 18 investigator” has the meaning given by subsection (2); “protected information”, in relation to a relevant warrant, meansinformation relating to any of the matters mentioned in section 57(4) of theInvestigatory Powers Act 2016 in relation to the warrant; “relevant authority” means—(a) in the case of intelligence service information obtained (directly or indirectly) from or relating to the Security Service, the Director-General of the Security Service;(b) in the case of intelligence service information obtained (directly or indirectly) from or relating to the Secret Intelligence Service, the Chief of the Secret Intelligence Service;(c) in the case of intelligence service information obtained (directly or indirectly) from or relating to GCHQ, the Director of GCHQ;(d) in the case of intelligence service information obtained (directly or indirectly) from or relating to Her Majesty's forces or the Ministry of Defence, the Secretary of State;(e) in the case of protected information relating to a relevant warrant, the person to whom the relevant warrant is or was addressed;(f) in the case of information within subsection (3)(c)—(i) the Secretary of State, or(ii) the Minister of the Crown in charge of the government department from which the information was obtained (if that Minister is not a Secretary of State);“relevant warrant” means—(a) a warrant under Chapter 1 of Part 2 of the Investigatory Powers Act 2016, or(b) a warrant under Chapter 1 of Part 6 of that Act.
50	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)Part 2 – Complaints and MisconductDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes21B	Provision of sensitive information to the [F272Director General] and certain investigators(1) A person who provides information that is intelligence service information or protected information relating to a relevant warrant to the [F272Director General] or a paragraph 18 investigator (whether under a provision of this Part or otherwise) must—(a) make the [F272Director General] or the paragraph 18 investigator aware that the information is intelligence service information or (as the case may be) protected information relating to a relevant warrant, and(b) provide the [F272Director General] or the paragraph 18 investigator with such additional information as will enable the [F272Director General] or the paragraph 18 investigator to identify the relevant authority in relation to the information.(2) In this section, “intelligence service information”, “protected information relating to a relevant warrant”, “paragraph 18 investigator” and “relevant authority” have the same meaning as in section 21A.]Guidance and regulations22 Power of the [F273Director General] to issue guidance(1) The [F273Director General] may issue guidance—(a) to [F274local policing bodies],(b) to chief officers, and(c) to persons who are serving with the police otherwise than as chief officers,concerning the exercise or performance, by the persons to whom the guidance is issued, of any of the powers or duties specified in subsection (2).(2) Those powers and duties are—(a) those that are conferred or imposed by or under this Part; and(b) those that are otherwise conferred or imposed but relate to—(i) the handling of complaints;(ii) the means by which recordable conduct matters [F275or DSI matters] are dealt with; or(iii) the detection or deterrence of misconduct by persons serving with the police.(i) 
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)	51Part 2 – Complaints and MisconductDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(3) Before issuing any guidance under this section, the [F273Director General] shall consult with—[F276[F277(a)	such persons as appear to the [F273Director General] to represent the views of police and crime commissioners;(aa)	the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime; (ab)	the Common Council;](b) [F278the National Police Chiefs' Council]; and](c) such other persons as [F279the Director General] thinks fit.(4) The approval of the Secretary of State shall be required for the issue by the [F273Director General] of any guidance under this section.(5) Without prejudice to the generality of the preceding provisions of this section, the guidance that may be issued under this section includes—(a) guidance about the handling of complaints which have not yet been recorded and about dealing with recordable conduct matters [F280or DSI matters] that have not been recorded;(b) guidance about the procedure to be followed by the appropriate authority when recording a complaint or any recordable conduct matter [F281or DSI matter];F282(c)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .(d) guidance about how to protect the scene of an incident or alleged incident which—(i) is or may become the subject-matter of a complaint; or(ii) is or may involve a recordable conduct matter [F281or DSI matter];(e) guidance about the circumstances in which it is appropriate (where it is lawful to do so)—(i) to disclose to any person, or to publish, any information about an investigation of a complaint [F283, conduct matter or DSI matter]; or(ii) to provide any person with, or to publish, any report or other document relating to such an investigation;F284(f)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .(6) Nothing in this section shall authorise the issuing of any guidance about a particular case.(7) It shall be the duty of every person to whom any guidance under this section is issued to have regard to that guidance in exercising or performing the powers and duties to which the guidance relates.(8) A failure by a person to whom guidance under this section is issued to have regard to the guidance shall be admissible in evidence in any disciplinary proceedings or on any appeal from a decision taken in any such proceedings.
52	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)Part 2 – Complaints and MisconductDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesF275 Words in s. 22(2)(b)(ii) inserted (1.7.2005) by Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15),ss. 160, 178, Sch. 12 para. 8(2); S.I. 2005/1521, art. 3(1)(w)F276 S. 22(3)(a)(b) substituted (1.4.2007) by Police and Justice Act 2006 (c. 48), ss. 6, 53, Sch. 4 para. 11;S.I. 2007/709, art. 3(d) (subject to arts. 6, 7)F277 S. 22(3)(a)-(ab) substituted for s. 22(3)(a) (16.1.2012) by Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13), s. 157(1), Sch. 16 para. 287(3); S.I. 2011/3019, art. 3, Sch. 1 (with Sch. 2 para. 65)F278 Words in s. 22(3)(b) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 3.4.2017 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 14 paras. 6, 7(e); S.I. 2017/399, reg. 2, Sch. para. 41F279 Words in s. 22(3)(c) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 30(3); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)F280 Words in s. 22(5)(a) inserted (1.7.2005) by Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15), ss.160, 178, Sch. 12 para. 8(3)(a); S.I. 2005/1521, art. 3(1)(w)F281 Words in s. 22(5)(b)(d)(ii) inserted (1.7.2005) by Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15), ss. 160, 178, Sch. 12 para. 8(3)(b); S.I. 2005/1521, art. 3(1)(w)F282 S. 22(5)(c) omitted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by virtue of Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 47(e)(i); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))F283 Words in s. 22(5)(e)(i) substituted (1.7.2005) by Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15),ss. 160, 178, Sch. 12 para. 8(3)(c); S.I. 2005/1521, art. 3(1)(w)F284 S. 22(5)(f) omitted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by virtue of Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 47(e)(ii); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))Modifications etc. (not altering text)C45 S. 22 applied (with modifications) (28.12.2005) by The Revenue and Customs (Complaints and Misconduct) Regulations 2005 (S.I. 2005/3311), reg. 3(2)(6), Sch. 1C46 S. 22 applied (with modifications) (5.8.2009) by The UK Border Agency (Complaints and Misconduct) Regulations 2009 (S.I. 2009/2133), reg. 4C47 S. 22 applied (with modifications) (7.4.2010) by The UK Border Agency (Complaints and Misconduct) Regulations 2010 (S.I. 2010/782), reg. 4C48 S. 22 applied (with modifications) (5.8.2010) by The Revenue and Customs (Complaints and Misconduct) Regulations 2010 (S.I. 2010/1813), reg. 5 (with reg. 11)C49 S. 22 applied (with modifications) (16.1.2012) by The Elected Local Policing Bodies (Complaints and Misconduct) Regulations 2012 (S.I. 2012/62), regs. 1, 4 (with reg. 3(6))C50 S. 22 applied (with modifications) (7.10.2013) by The National Crime Agency (Complaints and Misconduct) Regulations 2013 (S.I. 2013/2325), regs. 1(1), 5C51 S. 22 applied (with modifications) (30.4.2017) by The Gangmasters and Labour Abuse Authority (Complaints and Misconduct) Regulations 2017 (S.I. 2017/521), regs. 1, 523 Regulations(1) The Secretary of State may make regulations as to the procedure to be followed under any provision of this Part.(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the power conferred by subsection (1) or of any other power to make regulations conferred by any provision of this Part, the Secretary of State may also by regulations provide—(a) for the appropriate authority, in the case of a complaint [F285that relates to conduct of a person serving with the police], to be required, in accordance with procedures provided for in the regulations—(a) 
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)	53Part 2 – Complaints and MisconductDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(i) to supply the person complained against with a copy of the complaint; and(ii) to supply the complainant with a copy of the record made of that complaint;(b) for the matters to be taken into account in making any determination as to which procedure to adopt for handling complaints and dealing with recordable conduct matters [F286and DSI matters];(c) for any procedure for the purposes of this Part to be discontinued where—(i) a complaint is withdrawn;(ii) the complainant indicates that he does not wish any further steps to be taken; or(iii) the whole or part of the investigation of the complaint has been postponed until the conclusion of criminal proceedings and the complainant fails to indicate after the conclusion of those proceedings that he wishes the investigation to be resumed;and for the manner in which any such withdrawal or indication is to be effected or given, and for the circumstances in which it is to be taken as effected or given;(d) for requiring the subject-matter of a complaint that has been withdrawn to be treated for the purposes of this Part, in the cases and to the extent specified in the regulations, as a recordable conduct matter;(e) for the manner in which any procedure for the purposes of this Part is to be discontinued in a case where it is discontinued in accordance with the regulations, and for the consequences of any such discontinuance;(f) for the circumstances in which any investigation or other procedure under this Part may be or must be suspended to allow any other investigation or proceedings to continue, and for the consequences of such a suspension;(g) for the regulation of the appointment of persons to carry out investigations under this Part or to assist with the carrying out of such investigations, for limiting the persons who may be appointed and for the regulation of the carrying out of any such investigation;[F287(h) for combining into a single investigation the investigation of any complaint, conduct matter or DSI matter with the investigation or investigations of any one or more, or any combination, of the following—(i) complaints (whether or not relating to the same conduct),(ii) conduct matters, or(iii) DSI matters,and for splitting a single investigation into two or more separate investigations;](i) for the procedure to be followed in cases in which the [F288Director General] relinquishes the F289...[F290direction] of any investigation and for the consequences of [F291the Director General] doing so;(j) for the manner in which any reference of a complaint [F292, conduct matter or DSI matter] to the [F288Director General] is to be made;(k) for applying the provisions of this Part with such modifications as the Secretary of State thinks fit in cases where a complaint or recordable conduct matter relates to the conduct of a person who has ceased to be a person serving with the police since the time of the conduct;(i) 
54	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)Part 2 – Complaints and MisconductDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(l) for applying the provisions of this Part with such modifications as the Secretary of State thinks fit in cases where a complaint or conduct matter relates to the conduct of a person—(i) whose identity is unascertained at the time at which a complaint is made or a conduct matter is recorded;(ii) whose identity is not ascertained during, or subsequent to, the investigation of a complaint or recordable conduct matter;F293(m)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .(n) for the records to be kept by [F294local policing bodies] and chief officers—(i) with respect to complaints and purported complaints;(ii) with respect to recordable conduct matters [F295or DSI matters]; and(iii) with respect to the exercise and performance of their powers and duties under this Part;(o) for the [F288Director General] to be required to establish and maintain a register of such information provided to [F296the Director General or the Office] in accordance with this Part as may be of a description specified in the regulations and for regulating the extent to which information stored on that register may be published or otherwise disclosed to any person by the [F288Director General];(p) for chief officers to have power to delegate the exercise or performance of powers and duties conferred or imposed on them by or under this Part;[F297(pa) for local policing bodies to have power to delegate the exercise or performance of powers and duties conferred or imposed on them by or under this Part (including powers and duties that are acquired by virtue of giving a notice under section 13A);](q) for the manner in which any notification for the purposes of any provision of this Part is to be given and the time at which, or period within which, any such notification must be given.[F298(r) for enabling representations on behalf of a person to whose conduct an investigation relates to be made to the [F288Director General] by a person who is not that person's legal representative but is of a description specified in the regulations.]
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)	55Part 2 – Complaints and MisconductDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesF290 Word in s. 23(2)(i) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 47(f)(i)(b); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))F291 Words in s. 23(2)(i) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 31(3); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)F292 Words in s. 23(2)(j) substituted (1.7.2005) by Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15), ss.160, 178, Sch. 12 para. 9(4); S.I. 2005/1521, art. 3(1)(w)F293 S. 23(2)(m) omitted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by virtue of Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 47(f)(ii); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))F294 Words in s. 23(2)(n) substituted (16.1.2012) by Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13), s. 157(1), Sch. 16 para. 288; S.I. 2011/3019, art. 3, Sch. 1F295 Words in s. 23(2)(n)(ii) inserted (1.7.2005) by Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15),ss. 160, 178, Sch. 12 para. 9(5); S.I. 2005/1521, art. 3(1)(w)F296 Words in s. 23(2)(o) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 31(4); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)F297 S. 23(2)(pa) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), ss. 23(1), 183(1)(5)(e); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(j) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))F298 S. 23(2)(r) inserted (3.11.2008) by Criminal Justice and Immigration Act 2008 (c. 4), ss. 127, 153,Sch. 23 para. 2; S.I. 2008/2712, art. 2, Sch. para. 17(a) (subject to arts. 3, 4)Modifications etc. (not altering text)C52 S. 23 applied (with modifications) (28.12.2005) by The Revenue and Customs (Complaints and Misconduct) Regulations 2005 (S.I. 2005/3311), reg. 3(2)(6), Sch. 1C53 S. 23 applied (with modifications) (5.8.2009) by The UK Border Agency (Complaints and Misconduct) Regulations 2009 (S.I. 2009/2133), reg. 4C54 S. 23 applied (with modifications) (7.4.2010) by The UK Border Agency (Complaints and Misconduct) Regulations 2010 (S.I. 2010/782), reg. 4C55 S. 23 applied (with modifications) (5.8.2010) by The Revenue and Customs (Complaints and Misconduct) Regulations 2010 (S.I. 2010/1813), reg. 5 (with reg. 11)24 Consultation on regulationsBefore making any regulations under this Part, the Secretary of State shall consult with—[F299(a)	the Office;(aa)	the Director General;][F300[F301(b)	such persons as appear to the Secretary of State to represent the views of police and crime commissioners;(ba)	the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime; (bb)	the Common Council;](c) [F302the National Police Chiefs' Council]; and](d) such other persons as he thinks fit.
56	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)Part 2 – Complaints and MisconductDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesConduct of persons in other forms of police service25 NCIS and NCSF303. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .26 Forces maintained otherwise than by [F304local policing bodies](1) Notwithstanding any provision made by or under any enactment passed or made before this Act—(a) the [F305Director General], and(b) an authority other than a [F306local policing body] which maintains a body of constables,shall each have power to enter into an agreement with the other for the establishment and maintenance in relation to that body of constables of procedures corresponding or similar to any of those provided for by or under this Part.
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)	57Part 2 – Complaints and MisconductDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(2) If it appears to the Secretary of State appropriate to do so in relation to any body of constables maintained otherwise than by a [F307local policing body] to establish any such corresponding or similar procedures, he may by order—(a) provide for the establishment and maintenance of such procedures in relation to that body of constables; and(b) in a case in which procedures in relation to that body of constables have effect by virtue of subsection (9) or have previously been established by virtue of this section—(i) provide for those procedures to be superseded by the provision made by the order; and(ii) make transitional provision in connection with the replacement of the superseded procedures.(3) It shall be the duty of the Secretary of State to secure that procedures are established and maintained under subsection (2) in relation to each of the following—(a) the Ministry of Defence Police; and(b) the British Transport Police Force.(4) An agreement under this section shall not be made, varied or terminated except with the approval of the Secretary of State.(5) An agreement or order under this section in relation to any body of constables may contain provision for enabling the [F305Director General] to bring and conduct, or otherwise participate or intervene in, any proceedings which are identified by the agreement or order as disciplinary proceedings in relation to members of that body of constables.(6) An agreement or order under this section in relation to any body of constables may provide for the application of procedures in relation to persons who are not themselves constables but are employed for the purposes of that body of constables and in relation to the conduct of such persons, as well as in relation to members of that body of constables and their conduct.(7) Before making an order under this section the Secretary of State shall consult with both—(a) the [F305Director General]; and(b) the authority maintaining the body of constables to whom the order relates.(8) Procedures established in accordance with any agreement or order under this section shall have no effect in relation to anything done outside England and Wales by any constable or any person employed for the purposes of a body of constables.(9) Where, immediately before the coming into force of this section, any procedures have effect in relation to any body of constables by virtue of—(a) section 78 of the 1996 Act (which made provisions similar to that made by this section), or(b) paragraph 13 of Schedule 8 to that Act (transitional provisions),those procedures shall continue to have effect thereafter (notwithstanding the repeal by this Act of Chapter 1 of Part 4 of the 1996 Act and of that paragraph) until superseded by procedures established by virtue of any agreement or order under this section.(10) Subsection (9) has effect subject to the provisions of any order made under section 28.(1) 
58	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)Part 2 – Complaints and MisconductDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesF30826A Serious Organised Crime Agency. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .F30926B National Policing Improvement Agency. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .[F31026BACollege of Policing(1) The [F311Director General] and the College of Policing must enter into an agreement for the establishment, in relation to members of the College's staff, of procedures corresponding or similar to those provided for by or under this Part.(2) An agreement under this section—(a) must not be made or varied except with the approval of the Secretary of State; and(b) must not be terminated unless—(i) it is replaced by another such agreement, and(ii) the Secretary of State approves.(i) 
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)	59Part 2 – Complaints and MisconductDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(3) An agreement under this section may contain provision for enabling the [F311Director General] to bring and conduct, or otherwise participate or intervene in, any proceedings that are identified by the agreement as disciplinary hearings in relation to members of the College's staff.(4) Procedures established in accordance with an agreement under this section shall have no effect in relation to anything done outside England and Wales by any member of the College's staff.][F31226C The National Crime Agency(1) The Secretary of State must make regulations conferring functions on the [F313Director General] in relation to the exercise of functions by the Director General [F314of the National Crime Agency] and other National Crime Agency officers.(2) Regulations under this section may, in particular—(a) apply (with or without modifications), or make provision similar to, any provision of or made under this Part of this Act;(b) make provision for payment by the National Crime Agency to, or in respect of, the [F315the Office or in respect of its Director General].(3) Regulations under this section must relate only to the exercise of functions in, or in relation to, England and Wales.(4) The [F316Director General] and the Parliamentary Commissioner for Administration may jointly investigate a matter in relation to which—(a) the [F316Director General] has functions by virtue of this section, and(b) the Parliamentary Commissioner for Administration has functions by virtue of the Parliamentary Commissioner Act 1967.(5) A National Crime Agency officer may disclose information to the [F317Director General], or to a person acting on the [F318Director General's] behalf, for the purposes of the exercise by the [F319Director General], or by any person acting on the [F318Director General's] behalf, of an NCA complaints function.(6) The [F320Director General] and the Parliamentary Commissioner for Administration may disclose information to each other for the purposes of the exercise of a function—(a) by virtue of this section, or(b) under the Parliamentary Commissioner Act 1967.(7) Regulations under this section may, in particular, make—(a) further provision about the disclosure of information under subsection (5) or (6);(a) 
60	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)Part 2 – Complaints and MisconductDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(b) provision about the further disclosure of information that has been so disclosed;including provision which applies (with or without modifications), or is similar to, any provision of Schedule 7 to the Crime and Courts Act 2013.(8) Except as provided for in regulations under this section, that Schedule to that Act does not apply to—(a) the disclosure of information under subsection (5) or (6), or(b) the further disclosure of information so disclosed.(9) In this section “NCA complaints function” means a function in relation to the exercise of functions by the Director General [F321of the National Crime Agency] or any other National Crime Agency officer.]Textual AmendmentsF312 S. 26C inserted (8.5.2013 for specified purposes, 7.10.2013 in so far as not already in force) by Crime and Courts Act 2013 (c. 22), ss. 11(6), 61(2); S.I. 2013/1042, art. 2(d); S.I. 2013/1682, art. 3(p)F313 Words in s. 26C(1) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 35(2)(a); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)F314 Words in s. 26C(1) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 35(2)(b); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)F315 Words in s. 26C(2) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 35(3); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)F316 Words in s. 26C(4) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 35(4); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)F317 Words in s. 26C(5) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 35(5)(a); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)F318 Words in s. 26C(5) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 35(5)(b); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)F319 Words in s. 26C(5) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 35(5)(c); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)F320 Words in s. 26C(6) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 35(6); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)F321 Words in s. 26C(9) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 35(7); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)[F32226D Labour abuse prevention officers(1) The Secretary of State may make regulations conferring functions on the [F323Director General] in relation to the exercise of functions by officers of the Gangmasters and Labour Abuse Authority (the “Authority”) in their capacity as labour abuse prevention(1) 
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)	61Part 2 – Complaints and MisconductDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesofficers (see section 114B of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 (PACE powers for labour abuse prevention officers)).(2) Regulations under this section may, in particular—(a) apply (with or without modifications), or make provision similar to, any provision of or made under this Part;(b) make provision for payment by the Authority to, or in respect of, the[F324Office or in respect of the Director General].(3) The [F323Director General] and the Parliamentary Commissioner for Administration may jointly investigate a matter in relation to which—(a) the [F323Director General] has functions by virtue of this section, and(b) the Parliamentary Commissioner for Administration has functions by virtue of the Parliamentary Commissioner Act 1967.(4) An officer of the Authority may disclose information to the [F323Director General], or to a person acting on the [F325Director General's] behalf, for the purposes of the exercise by the [F323Director General], or by any person acting on the [F325Director General's] behalf, of an Authority complaints function.(5) The [F323Director General] and the Parliamentary Commissioner for Administration may disclose information to each other for the purposes of the exercise of a function—(a) by virtue of this section, or(b) under the Parliamentary Commissioner Act 1967.(6) Regulations under this section may, in particular, make—(a) further provision about the disclosure of information under subsection (4) or (5);(b) provision about the further disclosure of information that has been so disclosed.(7) In this section “Authority complaints function” means a function in relation to the exercise of functions by officers of the Authority.]
62	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)Part 2 – Complaints and MisconductDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes[F32626E Food crime officers(1) The Secretary of State may make regulations conferring functions on the Director General in relation to officers of the Food Standards Agency (the “Agency”) acting in the exercise of functions conferred on them by virtue of—(a) section 114C of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 (PACE powers for food crime officers), or(b) section 39A of the Criminal Justice and Public Order Act 1994 (powers for food crime officers: inferences from silence).(2) Regulations under this section may, in particular—(a) apply (with or without modifications), or make provision similar to, any provision of or made under this Part;(b) make provision for payment by the Agency to, or in respect of, the Office or in respect of the Director General.(3) The Director General and the Parliamentary Commissioner for Administration may jointly investigate a matter in relation to which—(a) the Director General has functions by virtue of this section, and(b) the Parliamentary Commissioner for Administration has functions by virtue of the Parliamentary Commissioner Act 1967.(4) An officer of the Agency may disclose information to the Director General or to a person acting on the Director General’s behalf, for the purposes of the exercise by the Director General or by any person acting on the Director General’s behalf, of an Agency complaints function.(5) The Director General and the Parliamentary Commissioner for Administration may disclose information to each other for the purposes of the exercise of a function—(a) by virtue of this section, or(b) under the Parliamentary Commissioner Act 1967.(6) Regulations under this section may, in particular, make—(a) further provision about the disclosure of information under subsection (4) or (5);(b) provision about the further disclosure of information that has been so disclosed.(7) A disclosure of information authorised by this section does not breach—(a) any obligation of confidence owed by the person making the disclosure, or(b) any other restriction on the disclosure of information (however imposed).(8) But this section does not authorise a disclosure of information that—(a) would contravene the data protection legislation (but in determining whether a disclosure would do so, the power conferred by this section is to be taken into account), or(b) is prohibited by any of Parts 1 to 7 or Chapter 1 of Part 9 of the Investigatory Powers Act 2016.(9) In this section—  “Agency complaints function” means a function in relation to the exercise of functions by officers of the Agency;  
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)	63Part 2 – Complaints and MisconductDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes  “data protection legislation” has the same meaning as in the Data Protection Act 2018 (see section 3 of that Act).][F32726F The Independent Commission for Reconciliation and Information Recovery(1) The Director General and the ICRIR may enter into an agreement for the establishment, in relation to ICRIR officers, of procedures corresponding or similar to those provided for by or under this Part.(2) Where no such agreement is in force, the Secretary of State may by regulations establish such procedures.(3) An agreement under this section must not be made, varied or terminated except with the approval of the Secretary of State.(4) Before making regulations under this section the Secretary of State must consult—(a) the Director General; and(b) the ICRIR.(5) Nothing in any other statutory provision prevents the ICRIR from carrying into effect procedures established by virtue of this section.(6) An agreement or regulations under this section may contain provision for enabling the Director General to bring and present, or otherwise participate or intervene in, any proceedings that are identified by the agreement as disciplinary proceedings in relation to ICRIR officers.(7) Procedures established in accordance with an agreement under this section, or by regulations under this section, have no effect in relation to anything done outside England and Wales by any ICRIR officer.(8) In this section—  “ICRIR” means the Independent Commission for Reconciliation and Information Recovery;  “ICRIR officer” has the same meaning as in the Northern Ireland Troubles (Legacy and Reconciliation) Act 2023.]27 Conduct of the [F328Office's] staff(1) The Secretary of State shall by regulations make provision for the manner in which the following cases are to be handled or dealt with—(1) 
64	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)Part 2 – Complaints and MisconductDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(a) cases in which allegations of misconduct are made against members of the[F328Office's] staff; and(b) cases in which there is otherwise an indication that there may have been misconduct by a member of the [F328Office's] staff.(2) Regulations under this section may apply, with such modifications as the Secretary of State thinks fit, any provision made by or under this Part.(3) Regulations under this section may provide for it to be the duty of any person on whom functions are conferred by the regulations to have regard, in the carrying out of those functions, to any guidance given by such persons and in such manner as may be specified in the regulations.(4) Before making any regulations under this section the Secretary of State shall consult with the [F329Office and the Director General].Transitional provisionsF33028	Transitional arrangements connected with establishing the Commission etc.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)	65Part 2 – Complaints and MisconductDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes[F33128A Application of Part 2 to old cases(1) The [F332Director General] may, if [F333the Director General] considers that there are exceptional circumstances—(a) direct that a relevant transitional provision does not apply in relation to a pre- commencement matter, and(b) direct the appropriate authority to record the matter under this Part.(2) A “pre-commencement matter” means a matter which—(a) is a complaint or a conduct matter,(b) relates to conduct which took place, or circumstances which occurred, before 1 April 2004, and(c) (apart from this section) is prevented by a relevant transitional provision from being recorded under this Part as a complaint or a conduct matter.(3) “Relevant transitional provision” means article 2, 3 or 4 of the Independent Police Complaints Commission (Transitional Provisions) Order 2004 (S.I. 2004/671).(4) The [F332Director General] may, if [F334the Director General] considers that there are exceptional circumstances, direct that a matter to which subsection (5) applies should be treated as a conduct matter or a DSI matter.(5) This subsection applies to a matter which—(a) relates to conduct which took place, or circumstances which occurred, before 1 April 2004,(b) has been the subject of a relevant complaint, and(c) would be a conduct matter or a DSI matter if it had not been the subject of a relevant complaint.(6) “Relevant complaint” means—(a) a complaint made before 1 April 2004, or(b) a complaint made on or after that date to which a relevant transitional provision applied.[ On and after the day on which section 45 of the Northern Ireland Troubles (LegacyF335(6A) and Reconciliation) Act 2023 comes into force, this section—(a) ceases to apply to a pre-commencement matter or a matter to which subsection (5) applies (if the direction under subsection (1) or (4) relating to the matter was given before that day), or(b) does not apply to a pre-commencement matter or matter to which subsection (5) applies (if the direction under subsection (1) or (4) relating to the matter is given on or after that day),insofar as the matter relates to conduct forming part of the Troubles.(6B) In subsection (6A) “conduct forming part of the Troubles” has the same meaning as in the Northern Ireland Troubles (Legacy and Reconciliation) Act 2023 (see section 1 of that Act).](7) Where under subsection (1)(a) the [F332Director General] directs that a relevant transitional provision does not apply in relation to a pre-commencement matter, that provision does not apply in relation to that matter.(8) The appropriate authority must comply with a direction under subsection (1)(b).(1) 
66	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)Part 2 – Complaints and MisconductDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(9) Where under subsection (4) the [F332Director General] directs that a matter should be treated as a conduct matter or a DSI matter, the matter is (subject to any regulations under subsection (10)) to be treated as a conduct matter or a DSI matter for the purposes of this Part (including subsections (1) and (2)) and any provision made under it.(10) The Secretary of State may by regulations provide for this Part or any provision made under it to apply with such modifications as the Secretary of State thinks fit to a matter in relation to which the [F332Director General] has made a direction under subsection (1) or (4).]Interpretation of Part 229	Interpretation of Part 2(1) In this Part—[F336“the appropriate authority”—(a) in relation to a person serving with the police or in relation to any complaint, conduct matter or investigation relating to the conduct of such a person, means—(i) if that person is [F337the chief officer or an acting chief officer, the local policing body] for the area of the police force of which he is a member; and(ii) if he is not [F338the chief officer or an acting chief officer], the chief officer under whose direction and control he is; F339...(aa) [F340in relation to any other complaint, means the chief officer of the police force with which dissatisfaction is expressed by the complainant; and](b) in relation to a death or serious injury matter, means—(i) if the relevant officer is [F341the chief officer or an acting chief officer, the local policing body] for the area of the police force of which he is a member; and(ii) if he is not [F342the chief officer or an acting chief officer], the chief officer under whose direction and control he is;](i) 
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)	67Part 2 – Complaints and MisconductDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes[F343and, for the purposes of this definition, “acting chief officer” means a person exercising or performing functions of a chief constable in accordance with section 41 of the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011; a person exercising powers or duties of the Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis in accordance with section 44 or 45(4) of that Act; or a person exercising duties of the Commissioner of Police for the City of London in accordance with section 25 of the City of London Police Act 1839;]“chief officer” means the chief officer of police of any police force;F344...“complainant” shall be construed in accordance with subsection (2); “complaint” has the meaning given by section 12;  “conduct” includes acts, omissions[F345, statements and decisions] (whether actual, alleged or inferred);“conduct matter” has the meaning given by section 12;  [F346“death or serious injury matter” and “DSI matter” have the meaning given by section 12;]  [F347“the Director General” means (unless otherwise specified) the Director General of the Office;]“disciplinary proceedings” means—(a) in relation to a member of a police force or a special constable, proceedings under any regulations made by virtue of section 50 or 51 of the 1996 Act and identified as disciplinary proceedings by those regulations; and(b) in relation to a person serving with the police who is not a member of a police force or a special constable, proceedings identified as such by regulations made by the Secretary of State for the purposes of this Part;  “document” means anything in which information of any description is recorded;“information” includes estimates and projections, and statistical analyses;F348...[F349“the Office” means the Independent Office for Police Conduct;] “person complained against”, in relation to a complaint [F350that relates toconduct of a person serving with the police], means the person whose conductis the subject-matter of the complaint;  “recordable conduct matter” means (subject to any regulations under section 23(2)(d))—(a) a conduct matter that is required to be recorded by the appropriate authority under paragraph 10 [F351, 11 or 13A] of Schedule 3 or has been so recorded; or(aa) [F352a conduct matter that is required to be recorded by the appropriate authority under section 28A(8) or has been so recorded;](b) F353. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .“relevant force”, in relation to the appropriate authority, means—(a) [F354if that authority is a local policing body, the police force which the body is responsible for maintaining; and](b) if that authority is the chief officer of police of a police force, his force;F355. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)Part 2 – Complaints and MisconductDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes  “serious injury” means a fracture, a deep cut, a deep laceration or an injury causing damage to an internal organ or the impairment of any bodily function; “serving with the police”, in relation to any person, shall be construed inaccordance with section [F35612(7) to (10)] .[F357(1A) In this Part “the relevant officer”, in relation to a DSI matter, means the person serving with the police (within the meaning of section [F35812(7) to (10)] )—(a) who arrested the person who has died or suffered serious injury,(b) in whose custody that person was at the time of the death or serious injury, or(c) with whom that person had the contact in question;and where there is more than one such person it means, subject to subsection (1B), the one who so dealt with him last before the death or serious injury occurred.(1B) Where it cannot be determined which of two or more persons serving with the police dealt with a person last before a death or serious injury occurred, the relevant officer is the most senior of them.](2) References in this Part, in relation to anything which is or purports to be a complaint, to the complainant are references—[F359(a)  to the person by whom the complaint or purported complaint was made, or(b) in a case where the complaint or purported complaint was made on behalf of someone else, to the person on whose behalf it was made;]but where any person is acting on another’s behalf for the purposes of any complaint or purported complaint, anything that is to be or may be done under this Part by or in relation to the complainant may be done, instead, by or in relation to the person acting on the complainant’s behalf.(3) Subject to subsection (4), references in this Part, in relation to any conduct or anything purporting to be a complaint about any conduct, to a member of the public include references to any person falling within any of the following paragraphs (whether at the time of the conduct or at any subsequent time)—(a) a person serving with the police;[F360(ca)	a National Crime Agency officer; or](d) a person engaged on relevant service, within the meaning of section 97(1)(a)F361... or (d) of the 1996 Act [F362(temporary service of various kinds)].(4) In this Part references, in relation to any conduct or to anything purporting to be a complaint about any conduct, to a member of the public do not include references to—(a) a person who, at the time when the conduct is supposed to have taken place, was under the direction and control of the same chief officer as the person whose conduct it was; or(b) a person who—(i) at the time when the conduct is supposed to have taken place, in relation to him, or(ii) at the time when he is supposed to have been adversely affected by it, or to have witnessed it,was on duty in his capacity as a person falling within subsection (3)(a) to (d).[F363(4A) In this Part references, in relation to anything purporting to be a complaint other than a complaint about any conduct, to a member of the public include references to any person falling within subsection (3)(a) to (d) other than a person who is—(a) a member of the police force with which dissatisfaction is expressed,(a) 
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)	69Part 2 – Complaints and MisconductDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(b) a civilian employee of that police force,(c) a special constable who is under the direction and control of the chief officer of that police force, or(d) where dissatisfaction is expressed with the City of London police force, an employee of the Common Council of the City of London who is under the direction and control of the chief officer of that force.](5) For the purposes of this Part a person is adversely affected if he suffers any form of loss or damage, distress or inconvenience, if he is put in danger or if he is otherwise unduly put at risk of being adversely affected.(6) References in this Part to the investigation of any complaint or matter by the appropriate authority on its own behalf, F364... under the [F365direction] of the [F366Director General] or by the [F366Director General]F367... shall be construed as references to its investigation in accordance with paragraph 16, F368... 18 or, as the case may be, 19 of Schedule 3.(7) The Commissioner of Police for the City of London shall be treated for the purposes of this Part as if he were a member of the City of London police force.[F369(8) References in sections 26, 26BA and 26C to England and Wales include the sea and other waters within the seaward limits of the territorial sea adjacent to England and Wales.]
70	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)Part 2 – Complaints and MisconductDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesF345 Words in s. 29(1) substituted (22.11.2012) by Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13), s. 157(1), Sch. 14 para. 5(1); S.I. 2012/2892, art. 2(g) (with art. 6)F346 S. 29(1): definition of "death or serious injury matter" and "DSI matter" inserted (1.7.2005) by Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15), ss. 160, 178, Sch. 12 para. 10(2)(b); S.I. 2005/1521, art. 3(1)(w)F347 Words in s. 29(1) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 40(2)(b); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)F348 Words in s. 29(1) omitted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by virtue of Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 47(g)(i); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))F349 Words in s. 29(1) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 40(2)(c); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)F350 Words in s. 29(1) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 4 para. 6(3); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(m) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))F351 Words in s. 29(1) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), ss. 17(10), 183(1)(5)(e); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(e) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))F352 Words in s. 29(1)(aa) inserted (19.12.2012) by Police (Complaints and Conduct) Act 2012 (c. 22), ss.2(4), 3(3)F353 Words in s. 29(1) omitted (22.11.2012) by virtue of Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13), s. 157(1), Sch. 14 para. 8(6)(b); S.I. 2012/2892, art. 2(g) (with art. 6)F354 Words in s. 29(1) substituted (16.1.2012) by Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13),s. 157(1), Sch. 16 para. 291(b); S.I. 2011/3019, art. 3, Sch. 1F355 Words in s. 29(1) omitted (22.11.2012) by virtue of Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13), s. 157(1), Sch. 16 para. 291(c); S.I. 2012/2892, art. 2(i)F356 Words in s. 29(1) substituted (1.10.2014) by Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12), s. 185(1), Sch. 11 para. 93(2) (with ss. 21, 33, 42, 58, 75, 93); S.I. 2014/2454, art. 3(c)(i)F357 S. 29(1A)(1B) inserted (1.7.2005) by Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15), ss. 160, 178, Sch. 12 para. 10(3); S.I. 2005/1521, art. 3(1)(w)F358 Words in s. 29(1A) substituted (1.10.2014) by Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12), s. 185(1), Sch. 11 para. 93(3) (with ss. 21, 33, 42, 58, 75, 93); S.I. 2014/2454, art. 3(c)(i)F359 S. 29(2)(a)(b) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 4 para. 6(4); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(m) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))F360 S. 29(3)(ca) substituted for s. 29(3)(b)(c) (7.10.2013) by Crime and Courts Act 2013 (c. 22), s. 61(2),Sch. 6 para. 16; S.I. 2013/1682, art. 3(q)F361 Word in s. 29(3)(d) repealed (1.4.2007) by Police and Justice Act 2006 (c. 48), ss. 52, 53, Sch. 15 Pt.1(A); S.I. 2007/709, art. 3(q) (subject to arts. 6, 7)F362 Words in s. 29(3)(d) substituted (1.4.2006) by Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15),ss. 55, 178, Sch. 2 para. 9(b); S.I. 2006/378, art. 4(1), Sch. para. 8 (subject to art. 4(2)-(7))F363 S. 29(4A) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 4 para. 6(5); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(m) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))F364 Words in s. 29(6) omitted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by virtue of Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 47(g)(ii)(a); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))F365 Word in s. 29(6) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 47(g)(ii)(b); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)	71Part 2A – Super-complaintsDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes[F370PART 2ASUPER-COMPLAINTS29A	Power to make super-complaints(1) A designated body may make a complaint to Her Majesty's Chief Inspector of Constabulary that a feature, or combination of features, of policing in England and Wales by one or more than one police force is, or appears to be, significantly harming the interests of the public.(2) See section 29B for the meaning of “designated body”.(3) In this section-  “England and Wales” includes the adjacent United Kingdom waters within the meaning of section 30 of the Police Act 1996,“police force” means any of the following—(a) the metropolitan police force,(b) a police force maintained under section 2 of the Police Act 1996 (police forces in England and Wales outside London),(c) the National Crime Agency,(d) the City of London police force,(e) the Ministry of Defence Police,(f) the Civil Nuclear Constabulary,(g) the British Transport Police.(a) 
72	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)Part 2A – Super-complaintsDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes[	Bodies who may make super-complaintsF37129B(1) In this Part “designated body” means a body designated in regulations made by the Secretary of State.(2) The Secretary of State—(a) may make or revoke such a designation if the Secretary of State considers it appropriate to do so, and(b) must make or revoke such a designation if asked to do so by an authorised person.(3) The Secretary of State must, in deciding whether to act under subsection (2)(a), apply criteria specified or described in regulations made by the Secretary of State.(4) The authorised person must, in deciding whether to ask the Secretary of State to act under subsection (2)(b), apply criteria specified or described in regulations made by the Secretary of State.(5) The Secretary of State must, before making regulations under subsection (3) or (4), consult such persons as the Secretary of State considers appropriate.(6) In this section “authorised person” means any person specified or described in regulations made by the Secretary of State.][	Regulations about super-complaintsF37229C(1) The Secretary of State may by regulations make provision about complaints under section 29A.(2) Such provision may, in particular, include provision about—(a) the procedure for dealing with a matter before a complaint is made under section 29A (including who is to deal with the matter),(b) the procedure for dealing with a complaint under section 29A (including who is to deal with the matter),(c) whether, or the extent to which, a matter is to be dealt with under this Part or Part 2.(3) Regulations under this section may—(a) confer (or enable the conferring of) functions on Her Majesty's Chief Inspector of Constabulary, the [F373Director General of the Independent Office for Police Conduct], the College of Policing or any other person,(b) apply (with or without modifications), in relation to any matter to be dealt with by the [F373Director General of the Independent Office for Police Conduct] under this Part, any provision made by or under Part 2.]](a) 
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)	73Part 2B – Investigation of concerns raised by whistle-blowersDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes[F374PART 2BINVESTIGATION OF CONCERNS RAISED BY WHISTLE-BLOWERS29D	Power to investigate concerns raised by whistle-blowers(1) The [F375Director General] may investigate any concern raised by a whistle-blower of which [F376the Director General] becomes aware (whether because the whistle-blower has contacted the [F375Director General] or for any other reason) but only if the whistle- blower informs the [F375Director General], before the beginning of the investigation, that he or she consents to an investigation taking place.(2) In deciding whether to investigate, the [F375Director General] must take into account the public interest.(3) For the purposes of this Part, a person is a “whistle-blower” if—(a) the person is, or was at any time, under the direction and control of a chief officer of police,(b) the person raises a concern that is about a police force or a person serving with the police,(c) the matter to which the concern relates is not—(i) about the conditions of service of persons serving with the police, or(ii) a matter that is, or could be, the subject of a complaint by the person under Part 2, and(d) at the time the [F375Director General] first becomes aware of the concern, the matter to which it relates is not—(i) under investigation under the direction of the [F375Director General] in accordance with paragraph 18 of Schedule 3,(ii) under investigation by the [F375Director General] in accordance with paragraph 19 of that Schedule,(iii) being dealt with as a complaint under section 29A under regulations under section 29C (regulations about super-complaints), or(iv) under investigation under this Part.(i) 
74	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)Part 2B – Investigation of concerns raised by whistle-blowersDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(4) Subsection (1) is subject to section 29F (which deals with the position where the concern is a conduct matter for the purposes of Part 2) and to section 29G (which deals with the position where the concern is a DSI matter for the purposes of that Part).(5) Schedule 3A (which makes provision about the procedure etc where the [F375Director General] decides to investigate under subsection (1)) has effect.29E	[F377Director General's] powers and duties [F378on decision] not to investigate(1) If the [F379Director General] decides not to carry out an investigation under section 29D(1), the [F379Director General] must inform the whistle-blower of the decision.(2) In such a case, the [F379Director General] may, with the consent of the whistle-blower—(a) disclose the nature of the concern to the appropriate authority, and(b) make recommendations in the light of the concern.(3) In this Part, except where otherwise provided, “appropriate authority” means—(a) if the concern relates to a chief officer or an acting chief officer, the local policing body for the area of the police force of which he or she is a member;(b) if the concern relates to any other person, the chief officer under whose direction and control that person is;(c) if the concern does not relate to any particular persons, the chief officer of the police force to which the concern relates.(4) The Secretary of State may by regulations make further provision about recommendations under subsection (2).(5) The regulations may (amongst other things)—(a) describe the kinds of recommendations that the [F379Director General] may make under subsection (2);(b) specify the persons to whom the recommendations may be made;(c) authorise the [F379Director General] to require a response to any recommendation made by the [F379Director General] under subsection (2).
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)	75Part 2B – Investigation of concerns raised by whistle-blowersDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes29F	Special provision for “conduct matters”(1) Before deciding whether to carry out an investigation under section 29D(1), the [F380Director General] must consider whether the concern is about a conduct matter for the purposes of Part 2 (see section 12(2)).(2) If the [F380Director General] determines that the concern is about a conduct matter for the purposes of Part 2—(a) [F381the Director General] may not carry out an investigation under section 29D(1), and(b) [F381the Director General] must notify the appropriate authority in relation to the person whose conduct is in question of [F382the] determination.(3) Where the appropriate authority in relation to the person whose conduct is in question is notified under subsection (2), it must record the matter under paragraph 11 of Schedule 3 to this Act as a conduct matter.(4) The Secretary of State may by regulations make provision modifying Schedule 3 in relation to a conduct matter that, in accordance with subsection (3), is recorded under paragraph 11 of that Schedule but only for the purpose of making provision for the protection of the anonymity of whistle-blowers.29G	Special provision for “DSI matters”(1) Before deciding whether to carry out an investigation under section 29D(1), the [F383Director General] must consider whether the concern is about a death or serious injury matter (“a DSI matter”) for the purposes of Part 2 (see section 12(2A)).(2) If the [F383Director General] determines that the concern is about a DSI matter for the purposes of Part 2—(a) [F384the Director General] may not carry out an investigation under section 29D(1), and(a) 
76	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)Part 2B – Investigation of concerns raised by whistle-blowersDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(b) [F384the Director General] must notify the appropriate authority in relation to the DSI matter.(3) Where the appropriate authority in relation to the DSI matter is notified under subsection (2), it must record the matter under paragraph 14A of Schedule 3 to this Act as a DSI matter.(4) The Secretary of State may by regulations make provision modifying Schedule 3 in relation to a DSI matter that, in accordance with subsection (3), is recorded under paragraph 14A of that Schedule but only for the purpose of making provision for the protection of the anonymity of whistle-blowers.(5) In this section, references to the appropriate authority in relation to a DSI matter have the same meaning as in Part 2 (see section 29).29H	[F385Director General's] powers and duties where whistle-blower is deceased(1) The power of the [F386Director General] to carry out an investigation under section 29D(1) applies where the whistle-blower dies before the [F386Director General] becomes aware of the concern (or before [F387the Director General] decides to investigate).(2) Any investigation begun by the [F386Director General] under section 29D(1) before the death of the whistle-blower may be continued after the death.(3) Where a whistle-blower dies—(a) any requirement under this Part to obtain the consent of the whistle- blower may be satisfied by obtaining the consent of that person's approved representative;(b) any requirement under this Part to give any document or other information to the whistle-blower may be satisfied by giving the document or other information to the person's approved representative;(c) any requirement under this Part not to disclose the identity of the whistle- blower does not apply or (where the [F386Director General] became aware of the concern before the death) ceases to apply.(4) For the purpose of this section, “approved representative” means a person who has been approved by the [F386Director General] for the purposes of this Part.(5) The [F386Director General] may only approve a person who is—(a) the widow or widower (or surviving civil partner) of the deceased whistle- blower,(b) a personal representative (within the meaning of section 55(1)(xi) of the Administration of Estates Act 1925) of the deceased whistle-blower, or(a) 
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)	77Part 2B – Investigation of concerns raised by whistle-blowersDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(c) any other person appearing to the [F386Director General] to have, by reason of a family or similar relationship with the deceased whistle-blower, a relevant interest in the outcome of the concern.29I	Duty to keep whistle-blowers informed(1) Where the [F388Director General] carries out an investigation under section 29D(1), [F389the Director General] must keep the whistle-blower properly informed about the progress of the investigation and its outcome.(2) The Secretary of State may by regulations provide for exceptions to the duty under subsection (1).(3) The power conferred by subsection (2) may be exercised only to the extent that the Secretary of State considers necessary for any of the permitted non-disclosure purposes.(4) “The permitted non-disclosure purposes” are—(a) preventing the premature or inappropriate disclosure of information that is relevant to, or may be used in, any actual or prospective criminal proceedings;(b) preventing the disclosure of information in any circumstances in which it has been determined in accordance with the regulations that its non-disclosure—(i) is in the interests of national security,(ii) is for the purposes of the prevention or detection of crime or the apprehension or prosecution of offenders,(iii) is for the purposes of the investigation of an allegation of misconduct against the whistle-blower or the taking of disciplinary proceedings or other appropriate action in relation to such an allegation,(iv) is for the purposes of an investigation under Part 2 that relates to the whistle-blower,(v) is required on proportionality grounds, or(vi) is otherwise necessary in the public interest.(5) The non-disclosure of information is required on proportionality grounds if its disclosure would cause, directly or indirectly, an adverse effect which would be disproportionate to the benefits arising from its disclosure.(1) 
78	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)Part 2B – Investigation of concerns raised by whistle-blowersDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes29J	Protection of anonymity of whistle-blowers(1) The Secretary of State may by regulations make provision setting out the circumstances in which the [F390Director General] is required or authorised to disclose information falling within subsection (2) (or any particular description of such information) to persons specified, or of a description specified, in the regulations.(2) The information falling within this subsection is—(a) the identity of a whistle-blower or information that might (whether alone or with other information) tend to reveal that identity;(b) the nature of a concern raised by a whistle-blower.(3) The power conferred by subsection (1) may be exercised only to the extent that the Secretary of State considers necessary for any of the permitted disclosure purposes.(4) “The permitted disclosure purposes” are—(a) the protection of the interests of national security;(b) the prevention or detection of crime or the apprehension of offenders;(c) the institution or conduct of criminal proceedings;(d) the investigation of allegations of misconduct against whistle-blowers and the taking of disciplinary proceedings or other appropriate action in relation to such allegations;(e) investigations under Part 2 that relate to whistle-blowers;(f) investigations under this Part;(g) any other purpose that is for the protection of the public interest.(5) Except as provided by regulations under subsection (1) or by any other provision of this Part, the [F390Director General] may not disclose information falling within subsection (2) unless the whistle-blower consents to the disclosure.29K	Other restrictions on disclosure of information(1) The Secretary of State may by regulations make provision setting out the circumstances in which the [F391Director General] is required or authorised to disclose(1) 
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)	79Part 2B – Investigation of concerns raised by whistle-blowersDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesinformation falling within subsection (2) (or any particular description of such information) to persons specified, or of a description specified, in the regulations.(2) The information falling within this subsection is—(a) information relating to an investigation under section 29D;(b) information relating to the outcome of any such investigation.(3) The power conferred by subsection (1) may be exercised only to the extent that the Secretary of State considers necessary for any of the permitted disclosure purposes.(4) In this section, “the permitted disclosure purposes” has the same meaning as in section 29J.(5) Except as provided by regulations under subsection (1) or by any other provision of this Part, the [F391Director General] may not disclose information falling within subsection (2).29L	Application of provisions of Part 2(1) The following provisions of Part 2 apply in relation to the functions of the [F392Director General] under this Part as they apply in relation to the functions of the [F392Director General] under Part 2—(a) section 15 (general duties of local policing bodies, chief officers and inspectors);(b) section 16 (payment for assistance with investigation);(c) section 17 (provision of information to the [F392Director General]);(d) section 18 (inspection of police premises on behalf of the [F392Director General]);(e) section 19 (use of investigatory powers by or on behalf of the [F392Director General]);(f) section 21A (restriction on disclosure of sensitive information);(g) section 21B (provision of sensitive information to the [F392Director General]);(h) section 22 (power of the [F392Director General] to issue guidance);(i) section 26 (forces maintained otherwise than by local policing bodies);(j) section 26BA (College of Policing);(k) section 26C (the National Crime Agency).(2) Except as provided by subsection (1), the provision made by sections 15 to 29 of Part 2 does not apply in relation to the functions of the [F392Director General] under this Part.(1) 
80	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)Part 2B – Investigation of concerns raised by whistle-blowersDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes29M	Regulation-making powers: consultationBefore making regulations under this Part, the Secretary of State must consult—(a) the [F393Director General],(b) such persons as appear to the Secretary of State to represent the views of police and crime commissioners,(c) the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime;(d) the Common Council,(e) the National Police Chiefs' Council, and(f) such other persons as the Secretary of State thinks fit.29N	Interpretation(1) In this Part—F394...“appropriate authority” has the meaning given by section 29E(3);  “chief officer” means the chief officer of police of any police force; and “acting chief officer” means (as appropriate)—(a) a person exercising or performing functions of a chief constable in accordance with section 41 of the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011,(b) a person exercising powers or duties of the Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis in accordance with section 44 or 45(4) of that Act, or(c) a person exercising duties of the Commissioner of Police for the City of London in accordance with section 25 of the City of London Police Act 1839;“conduct” has the same meaning as in Part 2 (see section 29(1));  [F395“the Director General” means the Director General of the Independent Office for Police Conduct;]“whistle-blower” has the meaning given by section 29D(3).(2) References in this Part to a person serving with the police have the same meaning as in Part 2 (see section 12(7)).](1) 
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)	81Part 3 – Removal, suspension and disciplining of police officersDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesPART 3REMOVAL, SUSPENSION AND DISCIPLINING OF POLICE OFFICERSRemoval and suspension of senior officers30 Resignation in the interests of efficiency and effectiveness(1) In section 9E of the 1996 Act (removal of Commissioner and Deputy Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis)—(a) in subsection (1), for “to retire in the interests of efficiency or effectiveness” there shall be substituted “ in the interests of efficiency or effectiveness, to retire or to resign ”; and(b) in subsection (3), for the words from “retire”, in the first place where it occurs, to “earlier date” there shall be substituted “ retire or resign under subsection (1), he shall retire or resign with effect from such date as the Metropolitan Police Authority may specify, or with effect from such earlier date ”.(2) In section 11 of that Act (removal of chief constables)—(a) in subsection (2), for “to retire in the interests of efficiency or effectiveness” there shall be substituted “ in the interests of efficiency or effectiveness, to retire or to resign ”; and(b) in subsection (4), for the words from “retire”, in the first place where it occurs, to “earlier date” there shall be substituted “ retire or resign under subsection (2), shall retire or resign with effect from such date as the police authority may specify, or with effect from such earlier date ”.31 Procedural requirements for removal of senior officers(1) In subsection (2) of section 9E of the 1996 Act (removal of Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis) for the words from “an opportunity” to the end there shall be substituted “—(a) an explanation in writing of the Authority’s grounds for calling upon him, in the interests of efficiency or effectiveness, to retire or to resign; and(b) an opportunity to make representations;and the Authority shall consider any representations made by or on behalf of the Commissioner.
82	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)Part 3 – Removal, suspension and disciplining of police officersDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesThe opportunity given to the Commissioner to make representations must include the opportunity to make them in person.”(2) In subsection (3) of section 11 of the 1996 Act (removal of chief constable), for the words from “an opportunity” to the end there shall be substituted “—(a) an explanation in writing of the authority’s grounds for calling upon him, in the interests of efficiency or effectiveness, to retire or to resign; and(b) an opportunity to make representations;and the authority shall consider any representations made by or on behalf of the chief officer.The opportunity given to the chief constable to make representations must include the opportunity to make them in person.”32 Suspension of senior officers(1) In section 9E of the 1996 Act (removal of Commissioner and Deputy Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis), after subsection (2) there shall be inserted—“(2A) The Metropolitan Police Authority, acting with the approval of the Secretary of State, may suspend the Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis from duty if—(a) it is proposing to consider whether to exercise its power under subsection (1) to call upon the Commissioner to retire or to resign and is satisfied that, in the light of the proposal, the maintenance of public confidence in the metropolitan police force requires the suspension; or(b) having been notified by the Secretary of State that he is proposing to consider whether to require the Authority to exercise that power, it is satisfied that, in the light of the Secretary of State’s proposal, the maintenance of public confidence in that force requires the suspension; or(c) it has exercised that power or been sent under section 42(2A) a copy of a notice of the Secretary of State’s intention to require it to exercise that power, but the retirement or resignation has not yet taken effect;and it shall be the duty of the Metropolitan Police Authority (without reference to the preceding provisions of this subsection) to suspend the Commissioner from duty if it is required to do so by the Secretary of State under section 42(1A).”(2) In section 11 of that Act (appointment and removal of chief constables), after subsection (3) there shall be inserted—“(3A) A police authority maintaining a police force under section 2, acting with the approval of the Secretary of State, may suspend from duty the chief constable of that force if—(a) it is proposing to consider whether to exercise its power under subsection (2) to call upon the chief constable to retire or to resign and is satisfied that, in the light of the proposal, the maintenance of public confidence in that force requires the suspension; or(a) 
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)	83Part 3 – Removal, suspension and disciplining of police officersDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(b) having been notified by the Secretary of State that he is proposing to consider whether to require the police authority to exercise that power, it is satisfied that, in the light of the Secretary of State’s proposal, the maintenance of public confidence in that force requires the suspension; or(c) it has exercised that power or been sent under section 42(2A) a copy of a notice of the Secretary of State’s intention to require it to exercise that power, but the retirement or resignation has not yet taken effect;and it shall be the duty of a police authority maintaining such a force (without reference to the preceding provisions of this subsection) to suspend the chief constable of that force from duty if it is required to do so by the Secretary of State under section 42(1A).”(3) In each of sections 9F(3), 9FA(3) and 9G(3) of that Act (application of sections 9E(1) to (3) in the case of Assistant Commissioners, Deputy Assistant Commissioners and Commanders), at the end there shall be inserted “but with the omission in subsection (2A)—(a) of paragraph (b);(b) in paragraph (c), of the words from “or been sent” to “exercise that power”; and(c) of the words after paragraph (c).”(4) In section 11A(3) of that Act (application of section 11(2) to (4) in the case of deputy chief constables), at the end there shall be inserted “but with the omission in subsection (3A)—(a) of paragraph (b);(b) in paragraph (c), of the words from “or been sent” to “exercise that power”; and(c) of the words after paragraph (c).”(5) In section 12(3) of that Act (application of section 11(2), (3) and (4) in the case of assistant chief constables)—(a) for “, (3) and” there shall be substituted “ to ”; and(b) at the end there shall be inserted “but with the omission in subsection (3A) —(a) of paragraph (b);(b) in paragraph (c), of the words from “or been sent” to “exercise that power”; and(c) of the words after paragraph (c).”33 Removal etc. of senior officers at the instance of the Secretary of State(1) Section 42 of the 1996 Act (role of the Secretary of State as respects removal of chief constables etc.) shall be amended as follows.(2) For subsections (1) and (2) there shall be substituted— “(1) The Secretary of State may—(a) require the Metropolitan Police Authority to exercise its power under section 9E to call upon the Commissioner or Deputy Commissioner, in the interests of efficiency or effectiveness, to retire or to resign; or(b) require a police authority maintaining a police force under section 2 to exercise its power under section 11 to call upon the chief constable(a) 
84	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)Part 3 – Removal, suspension and disciplining of police officersDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesof that force, in the interests of efficiency or effectiveness, to retire or to resign.(1A) The Secretary of State may also, in any case falling within subsection (1B) in which he considers that it is necessary for the maintenance of public confidence in the force in question—(a) require the Metropolitan Police Authority to suspend the Commissioner or Deputy Commissioner from duty; or(b) require a police authority maintaining a police force under section 2 to suspend the chief constable of that force from duty.(1B) The cases falling within this subsection are—(a) where the Secretary of State is proposing to exercise his power under subsection (1) in relation to the Metropolitan Police Authority or, as the case may be, the other police authority in question, or is proposing to consider so exercising that power;(b) where the Metropolitan Police Authority or the other police authority in question is itself proposing to exercise its power to call upon the Commissioner or Deputy Commissioner or, as the case may be, the chief constable of the force in question to retire or to resign, or is proposing to consider so exercising that power; and(c) where the power mentioned in paragraph (a) or (b) has been exercised but the retirement or resignation has not yet taken effect.(2) Before requiring the exercise by the Metropolitan Police Authority or any other police authority of its power to call upon the Commissioner or Deputy Commissioner or the chief constable of the force in question to retire or to resign, the Secretary of State shall—(a) give the officer concerned a notice in writing—(i) informing him of the Secretary of State’s intention to require the exercise of that power; and(ii) explaining the Secretary of State’s grounds for requiring the exercise of that power; and(b) give that officer an opportunity to make representations to the Secretary of State.(2A) Where the Secretary of State gives a notice under subsection (2)(a), he shall send a copy of the notice to the Metropolitan Police Authority or other police authority concerned.(2B) The Secretary of State shall consider any representations made to him under subsection (2).”(3) In subsection (3) (inquiries), for the words from the beginning to “subsection (1)” there shall be substituted—“(3) Where the Secretary of State proposes to require the exercise of a power mentioned in subsection (1), he”.(4) After subsection (3) there shall be inserted— “(3A) At an inquiry held under subsection (3)—(1) 
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)	85Part 3 – Removal, suspension and disciplining of police officersDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(a) the Commissioner, Deputy Commissioner or, as the case may be, the chief constable in question shall be entitled, in accordance with any regulations under section 42A, to make representations to the inquiry;(b) the Metropolitan Police Authority or, as the case may be, the police authority concerned shall be entitled, in accordance with any regulations made under section 42A, to make representations to the inquiry.(3B) The entitlement of the Commissioner, Deputy Commissioner or, as the case may be, the chief constable in question to make representations shall include the entitlement to make them in person.”(5) In subsection (4) (expenses of inquiry), for the words “a chief constable, deputy chief constable or assistant chief constable” there shall be substituted “ the Commissioner, the Deputy Commissioner or a chief constable ”.(6) After subsection (4) there shall be inserted—“(4A) If the Secretary of State exercises the power conferred by subsection (1) in relation to the Commissioner or the Deputy Commissioner or a chief constable, the Metropolitan Police Authority or other police authority concerned—(a) shall not be required to seek the Secretary of State’s approval before calling upon the Commissioner or Deputy Commissioner or chief constable in question, in the interests of efficiency or effectiveness, to retire or to resign; and(b) shall not be required to give the Commissioner, the Deputy Commissioner or the chief constable a written explanation of the authority’s grounds for calling upon him to retire or to resign, to give him an opportunity to make representations to it or to consider any representations made by him.(4B) In this section “the Commissioner” means the Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis and “the Deputy Commissioner” means the Deputy Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis.(4C) In this section a reference to the police authority concerned, in relation to a chief constable, is to the police authority which maintains the police force of which he is chief constable.”(7) Subsection (5) (application to senior officers in the metropolitan police) shall cease to have effect.34 Regulations concerning procedure for removal of senior officersAfter section 42 of the 1996 Act, there shall be inserted—“42A Procedure in relation to removal of senior officers(1) The Secretary of State may by regulations make provision as to the procedure to be followed in the exercise of any power conferred or duty imposed by section 9E, 11 or 42.(1) 
86	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)Part 3 – Removal, suspension and disciplining of police officersDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(2) Before making any regulations under this section, the Secretary of State shall consult with—(a) persons whom he considers to represent the interests of police authorities;(b) persons whom he considers to represent the interests of chief officers of police; and(c) such other persons as he thinks fit.(3) Regulations under this section may make different provision for different cases and circumstances.(4) A statutory instrument containing regulations under this section shall be subject to annulment in pursuance of a resolution of either House of Parliament.”Disciplinary proceedings and protected disclosures35 Disciplinary regulations for special constablesIn section 51 of the 1996 Act (regulations for special constables), in subsection (2), after paragraph (b) there shall be inserted—“(ba)	the conduct of special constables and the maintenance of discipline;”.36 Conduct of disciplinary proceedings(1) Without prejudice to the generality of any of the powers conferred by sections 50 and 51 of the 1996 Act (regulations for police forces and for special constables), regulations under each of those sections may make provision—(a) for conferring a right to bring and conduct, or otherwise participate or intervene in, any disciplinary proceedings on the [F396Director General of the Independent Office for Police Conduct];(b) for conferring a right to participate in, or to be present at, disciplinary proceedings on such persons as may be specified or described in the regulations; and(c) for section 34 of the Criminal Justice and Public Order Act 1994 (c. 33) (inferences to be drawn from a failure to mention a fact when questioned or charged) to apply, with such modifications and in such cases as may be provided for in the regulations, to disciplinary proceedings.(2) In this section “disciplinary proceedings” means any proceedings under any regulations made under section 50 or, as the case may be, section 51 of 1996 Act which are identified as disciplinary proceedings by those regulations.
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)	87Part 3 – Removal, suspension and disciplining of police officersDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes37 Protected disclosures by police officers(1) After section 43K of the Employment Rights Act 1996 (c. 18), there shall be inserted—“43KA Application of this Part and related provisions to police(1) For the purposes of—(a) this Part,(b) section 47B and sections 48 and 49 so far as relating to that section, and(c) section 103A and the other provisions of Part 10 so far as relating to the right not to be unfairly dismissed in a case where the dismissal is unfair by virtue of section 103A,a person who holds, otherwise than under a contract of employment, the office of constable or an appointment as a police cadet shall be treated as an employee employed by the relevant officer under a contract of employment; and any reference to a worker being “employed” and to his “employer” shall be construed accordingly.(2) In this section “the relevant officer” means—(a) in relation to a member of a police force or a special constable appointed for a police area, the chief officer of police;(b) in relation to a person appointed as a police member of the NCIS, the Director General of NCIS;(c) in relation to a person appointed as a police member of the NCS, the Director General of NCS;(d) in relation to any other person holding the office of constable or an appointment as police cadet, the person who has the direction and control of the body of constables or cadets in question.”(2) In section 200(1) of that Act (provisions which do not apply to persons engaged in police service under a contract of employment)—(a) the words “, Part IVA” and “, 47B” shall be omitted;(b) after “sections 100” there shall be inserted “ , 103A ”; and(c) after “section 100” there shall be inserted “ or 103A ”.(3) Section 13 of the Public Interest Disclosure Act 1998 (c. 23) (exclusion of police service from provisions about protected disclosures) shall cease to have effect.(1) 
88	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)Part 4 – Police powers etc.Chapter 1 – Exercise of police powers etc. by civiliansDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesPART 4POLICE POWERS ETC.CHAPTER 1EXERCISE OF POLICE POWERS ETC. BY CIVILIANSF39838	Police powers for [F397civilian staff][F398and volunteers][F399(1) The chief officer of police of any police force may designate a relevant employee as either or both of the following—(a) a community support officer;(b) a policing support officer.(1A) The chief officer of police of any police force may designate a police volunteer as either or both of the following—(a) a community support volunteer;(b) a policing support volunteer.](3) F400. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .(4) A chief officer of police F401. . . shall not designate a person under this section unless he is satisfied that that person—(a) is a suitable person to carry out the functions for the purposes of which he is designated;(b) is capable of effectively carrying out those functions; and(c) has received adequate training in the carrying out of those functions and in the exercise and performance of the powers and duties to be conferred [F402or imposed] on him by virtue of the designation.(5) A person designated under this section shall have the powers and duties conferred or imposed on him by the designation.F403(5A) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .F403(5B) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .F403(6) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .F403(6A) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .[F404(6B) The powers and duties that may be conferred or imposed on a person designated under this section are—(a) any power or duty of a constable, other than a power or duty specified in Part 1 of Schedule 3B (excluded powers and duties);(b) where the person is designated as a community support officer or a community support volunteer, any power or duty that is described in Schedule 3C as a power or duty of a community support officer or community support volunteer.(6C) The Secretary of State may by regulations amend Part 1 of Schedule 3B so as to add to the list of powers and duties specified in it.
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)	89Part 4 – Police powers etc.Chapter 1 – Exercise of police powers etc. by civilians Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(6D) Part 2 of Schedule 3B makes provision about the application of legislation in relation to powers or duties of a constable that may be exercised or performed by a person designated under this section.(6E) Any power or duty of a constable that is conferred or imposed on a person designated under this section by a chief officer of police of a police force may (subject to provision included in the designation under subsection (6F)) be exercised or performed by the person—(a) in the area of that police force, and(b) in any cases or circumstances in which it could be exercised or performed by a constable who is a member of that force.(6F) A designation under this section may provide that any power or duty of a constable that is conferred or imposed by the designation may be exercised or performed by the person designated—(a) in such areas outside the area of the police force in question as are specified in the designation (as well as within the area of the police force);(b) only in such parts of the area of that police force as are specified in the designation;(c) only in cases or circumstances so specified.](7) [F405A relevant employee]F406. . . authorised or required to do anything by virtue of a designation under this section—(a) shall not be authorised or required by virtue of that designation to engage in any conduct otherwise than in the course of that employment; and(b) shall be so authorised or required subject to such restrictions and conditions (if any) as may be specified in his designation.[F407(7A) A police volunteer authorised or required to do anything by virtue of a designation under this section —(a) shall not be authorised or required by virtue of that designation to engage in any conduct otherwise than while acting as a police volunteer;(b) shall be so authorised or required subject to such restrictions and conditions (if any) as may be specified in the designation.](8) Where any power exercisable by any person in reliance on his designation under this section is a power which, in the case of its exercise by a constable, includes or is supplemented by a power to use reasonable force, any person exercising that power in reliance on that designation shall have the same entitlement as a constable to use reasonable force.(9) Where any power exercisable by any person in reliance on his designation under this section includes power to use force to enter any premises, that power shall not be exercisable by that person except—(a) in the company, and under the supervision, of a constable; or(b) for the purpose of saving life or limb or preventing serious damage to property.[F408(9A) The chief officer of police of a police force must ensure that no person designated by the chief officer under this section is authorised to use a firearm, within the meaning given by section 57(1) of the Firearms Act 1968, in carrying out functions for the purposes of the designation.(9B) However, subsection (9A) does not apply to—
90	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)Part 4 – Police powers etc.Chapter 1 – Exercise of police powers etc. by civiliansDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(a) the use of a weapon, designed or adapted for the discharge of either of the following substances, for the purpose of discharging either of those substances—(i) the substance, commonly known as “CS spray”, that is produced by the use of 2-chlorobenzalmalononitrile;(ii) the substance, commonly known as PAVA spray, that is produced by the use of pelargonic acid vanillylamide;(b) the use of a weapon for a purpose specified in regulations made by the Secretary of State;(c) the use of a weapon of a description specified in regulations made by the Secretary of State, whether generally or for a purpose so specified.][F409(9C) A statutory instrument containing regulations under subsection (6C) or (9B)(b) or (c) may not be made unless a draft of the instrument has been laid before and approved by a resolution of each House of Parliament.][F410(11) In this section “relevant employee” means—(a) in the case of—(i) a police force maintained for a police area in accordance with section 2 of the Police Act 1996, or(ii) the police force maintained for the metropolitan police district in accordance with section 5A of that Act,a member of the civilian staff of that police force (within the meaning of Part 1 of the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011);(b) in the case of any other police force, a person who—(i) is employed by the police authority maintaining that force, and(ii) is under the direction and control of the chief officer making a designation under subsection (1).][F411(11A) In the case of a police force maintained for a police area in England in accordance with section 2 of the Police Act 1996, the following are also relevant employees for the purposes of this section—(a) any member of staff transferred to the chief constable of the police force under a scheme made under section 4I(1) of the Fire and Rescue Services Act 2004 (transfer of property, rights and liabilities to chief constable to whom fire functions of a fire and rescue authority may be delegated);(b) any member of staff appointed by that chief constable under section 4I(4) of that Act (appointment of staff by chief constable to whom fire functions of a fire and rescue authority may be delegated).(a) 
[F412(c)
any member of staff transferred to that chief constable under a scheme made by virtue of section 107EC(1) of the Local Democracy, Economic Development and Construction Act 2009 (transfer of property, rights and liabilities to chief constable to whom fire functions of combined authority may be delegated);
(d)  any member of staff appointed by that chief constable under section 107EC(2) of that Act (appointment of staff by chief constable to whom fire functions of combined authority may be delegated).]][F413(12) In this section, “police volunteer” means a person who is under the direction and control of the chief officer making a designation under subsection (1A) otherwise than because the person is a constable, a special constable or a relevant employee.
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)	91Part 4 – Police powers etc.Chapter 1 – Exercise of police powers etc. by civilians Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(13) For the purpose of subsection (12), a person is to be treated as a relevant employee only in relation to times when the person is acting in the course of the person's employment.]Textual AmendmentsF397 Words in s. 38 title substituted (16.1.2012) by Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13), s. 157(1), Sch. 16 para. 292(2); S.I. 2011/3019, art. 3, Sch. 1F398 Words in s. 38 heading inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 15.12.2017 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), ss. 38(9), 183(1)(5)(e); S.I. 2017/1139, reg. 2(d) (with regs. 4, 5) (as amended by S.I. 2017/1162, reg. 2)F399 S. 38(1)(1A) substituted for s. 38(1)(2) (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 15.12.2017 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), ss. 38(2), s. 183(1)(5)(e); S.I. 2017/1139, reg. 2(d) (with regs. 4, 5) (as amended by S.I. 2017/1162, reg. 2)F400 S. 38(3) repealed (1.4.2006) by Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15), ss. 59, 174, 178,Sch. 4 para. 181(2), Sch. 17 Pt. 2; S.I. 2006/378, art. 4(1), Sch. paras. 10, 12, 13(oo) (subject to art.4(2)-(7))F401 Words in s. 38(4) repealed (1.4.2006) by Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15), ss. 59, 174, 178, Sch. 4 para. 181(3), Sch. 17 Pt. 2; S.I. 2006/378, art. 4(1), Sch. paras. 10, 12, 13(oo)(subject to art. 4(2)-(7))F402 Words in s. 38(4)(c) inserted (1.12.2007) by Police and Justice Act 2006 (c. 48), ss. 9, 53, Sch. 5 para.2(2); S.I. 2007/3203, art. 2(c)F403 S. 38(5A)-(6A) omitted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 15.12.2017 in so far as not already in force) by virtue of Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), ss. 38(3), 183(1)(5)(e); S.I. 2017/1139, reg. 2(d) (with regs. 4, 5) (as amended by S.I. 2017/1162, reg. 2)F404 S. 38(6B)-(6F) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 15.12.2017 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), ss. 38(4), 183(1)(5)(e); S.I. 2017/1139, reg. 2(d) (with regs. 4, 5) (as amended by S.I. 2017/1162, reg. 2)F405 Words in s. 38(7) substituted (16.1.2012) by Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13),s. 157(1), Sch. 16 para. 292(4); S.I. 2011/3019, art. 3, Sch. 1F406 Words in s. 38(7) repealed (1.4.2006) by Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15), ss. 59, 174, 178, Sch. 4 para. 181(4), Sch. 17 Pt. 2; S.I. 2006/378, art. 4(1), Sch. paras. 10, 12, 13(oo)(subject to art. 4(2)-(7))F407 S. 38(7A) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 15.12.2017 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), ss. 38(5), 183(1)(5)(e); S.I. 2017/1139, reg. 2(d) (with regs. 4, 5) (as amended by S.I. 2017/1162, reg. 2)F408 S. 38(9A)(9B) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 15.12.2017 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), ss. 38(6), 183(1)(5)(e); S.I. 2017/1139, reg. 2(d) (with regs. 4, 5) (as amended by S.I. 2017/1162, reg. 2)F409 S. 38(9C) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 15.12.2017 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), ss. 38(7), 183(1)(5)(e); S.I. 2017/1139, reg. 2(d) (with regs. 4, 5) (as amended by S.I. 2017/1162, reg. 2)F410 S. 38(11) inserted (16.1.2012) by Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13), s. 157(1),Sch. 16 para. 292(5); S.I. 2011/3019, art. 3, Sch. 1F411 S. 38(11A) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 3.4.2017 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 1 para. 82; S.I. 2017/399, reg. 2, Sch. para. 38F412 S. 38(11A)(c)(d) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 17.7.2017 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), ss. 8(7), s. 183(1)(5)(e); S.I. 2017/726, reg. 2(a)F413 S. 38(12)(13) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 15.12.2017 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), ss. 38(8), 183(1)(5)(e); S.I. 2017/1139, reg. 2(d) (with regs. 4, 5) (as amended by S.I. 2017/1162, reg. 2)
92	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)Part 4 – Police powers etc.Chapter 1 – Exercise of police powers etc. by civiliansDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesF41438A Standard powers and duties of community support officers. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .[F41538B Police powers for civilian employees under collaboration agreements(1) The chief officer of police of a police force (the “assisted force”) may designate a person (“C”) who—(a) is a civilian employee of [F416, or a police volunteer with,] another police force (the “assisting force”),(b) is designated under section 38 by the chief officer of police of the assisting police force (the “section 38 designation”), and(c) is permitted, under relevant police collaboration provision, to discharge powers and duties specified in that provision for the purposes of the assisted force.(2) The designation under subsection (1) (the “collaboration designation”) must designate C as an officer of [F417either or both of the descriptions specified in section 38(1) (if C is a civilian employee of the assisting force) or section 38(1A) (if C is a police volunteer with the assisting force)].(3) The collaboration designation may designate C as an officer of a particular description specified in [F418section 38(1) or (as the case may be) section 38(1A)] only if the section 38 designation designates C as an officer of that description.(4) C shall have the powers and duties conferred or imposed on C by the collaboration designation.(5) A power or duty may be conferred or imposed on C by the collaboration designation only if C is permitted, under the relevant police collaboration provision, to discharge that power or duty for the purposes of the assisted force.(6) C shall not be authorised or required by virtue of the collaboration designation to engage in any conduct otherwise than in the course of discharging a power or duty conferred or imposed on C by the collaboration designation.(7) The collaboration designation must specify the restrictions and conditions to which C is subject in the discharge of the powers and duties conferred or imposed by the collaboration designation.(8) Those restrictions and conditions must include the restrictions and conditions specified in the relevant police collaboration provision.(1) 
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)	93Part 4 – Police powers etc.Chapter 1 – Exercise of police powers etc. by civilians Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(9) C is authorised or required to discharge any power or duty conferred or imposed by the collaboration designation subject to the restrictions and conditions specified in the collaboration designation.(10) References in this section to the discharge of functions by [F419persons designated under section 38 by the chief officer of police of the assisting force] for the purposes of the assisted force have the same meaning as in [F420section 23AA] of the Police Act 1996.(11) In this section—  “civilian employee” has the meaning given by section 23I of the Police Act 1996;  “relevant police collaboration provision” means provision, contained in a collaboration agreement under section 22A of the Police Act 1996, which is of the kind referred to in section 23AA of that Act.38C	Designations under section 38B: supplementary provision(1) The collaboration designation of C must be in accordance with the relevant police collaboration provision.(2) Subsection (1) is in addition to section 38B(5) and (8).(3) Subsections (8) and (9) of section 38 apply to any power exercisable by C in reliance on the collaboration designation as they apply to a power exercisable by a person in reliance on a designation under section 38.(4) In exercising or performing any power or duty in reliance on the collaboration designation, C is to be taken—(a) as exercising or performing that power or duty in reliance on that collaboration designation (and not in reliance on any designation under section 38); and(a) 
94	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)Part 4 – Police powers etc.Chapter 1 – Exercise of police powers etc. by civiliansDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(b) accordingly, as not being a designated person (within the meaning of section 46(1)) by virtue of any designation under section 38.(5) Expressions used in this section and section 38B have the same meanings in this section as in section 38B.]39 Police powers for contracted-out staff(1) This section applies if a [F421local policing body] has entered into a contract with a person (“the contractor”) for the provision of services relating to the detention or escort of persons who have been arrested or are otherwise in custody.(2) The chief officer of police of the police force maintained by that [F421local policing body] may designate any person who is an employee of the contractor as either or both of the following—(a) a detention officer; or(b) an escort officer.(3) A person designated under this section shall have the powers and duties conferred or imposed on him by the designation.(4) A chief officer of police shall not designate a person under this section unless he is satisfied that that person—(a) is a suitable person to carry out the functions for the purposes of which he is designated;(b) is capable of effectively carrying out those functions; and(c) has received adequate training in the carrying out of those functions and in the exercise and performance of the powers and duties to be conferred on him by virtue of the designation.(5) A chief officer of police shall not designate a person under this section unless he is satisfied that the contractor is a fit and proper person to supervise the carrying out of the functions for the purposes of which that person is designated.(6) Powers and duties may be conferred or imposed on a designated person by means only of the application to him by his designation of provisions of the applicable Part of Schedule 4 that are to apply to the designated person; and for this purpose the applicable Part of that Schedule is—(a) in the case of a person designated as a detention officer, Part 3; and(b) in the case of a person designated as an escort officer, Part 4.(7) An employee of the contractor authorised or required to do anything by virtue of a designation under this section—(a) shall not be authorised or required by virtue of that designation to engage in any conduct otherwise than in the course of that employment; and(b) shall be so authorised or required subject to such restrictions and conditions (if any) as may be specified in his designation.(a) 
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)	95Part 4 – Police powers etc.Chapter 1 – Exercise of police powers etc. by civilians Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(8) Where any power exercisable by any person in reliance on his designation under this section is a power which, in the case of its exercise by a constable, includes or is supplemented by a power to use reasonable force, any person exercising that power in reliance on that designation shall have the same entitlement as a constable to use reasonable force.F422(9) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .F422(10) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .F422(11) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .(12) A designation under this section, unless it is previously withdrawn or ceases to have effect in accordance with subsection (13), shall remain in force for such period as may be specified in the designation; but it may be renewed at any time with effect from the time when it would otherwise expire.(13) A designation under this section shall cease to have effect—(a) if the designated person ceases to be an employee of the contractor; or(b) if the contract between the [F423local policing body] and the contractor is terminated or expires.40 Community safety accreditation schemes(1) The chief officer of police of any police force may, if he considers that it is appropriate to do so for the purposes specified in subsection (3), establish and maintain a scheme (“a community safety accreditation scheme”).(2) A community safety accreditation scheme is a scheme for the exercise in the chief officer’s police area by persons accredited by him under section 41 of the powers conferred by their accreditations under that section.(3) Those purposes are—(a) contributing to community safety and security; and(a) 
96	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)Part 4 – Police powers etc.Chapter 1 – Exercise of police powers etc. by civiliansDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(b) in co-operation with the police force for the area, combatting crime and disorder, public nuisance and other forms of anti-social behaviour.(4) Before establishing a community safety accreditation scheme for his police area, a chief officer of any police force (other than the Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis) must consult with—(a) the [F424local policing body] maintaining that force, and(b) every local authority any part of whose area lies within the police area.(5) Before establishing a community safety accreditation scheme for the metropolitan police district, the Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis must consult with— [F425(a)	the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime;](b) the Mayor of London; and(c) every local authority any part of whose area lies within the metropolitan police district.(6) In subsections (4)(b) and (5)(c) “local authority” means—(a) in relation to England, a district council, a London borough council, the Common Council of the City of London or the Council of the Isles of Scilly; and(b) in relation to Wales, a county council or a county borough council.(7) Every [F426police and crime plan under section 5 or 6 of the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011] which is issued after the commencement of this section, F427... must set out—(a) whether a community safety accreditation scheme is maintained for the police area in question;(b) if not, whether there is any proposal to establish such a scheme for that area during the period to which the plan relates;(c) particulars of any such proposal or of any proposal to modify during that period any community safety accreditation scheme that is already maintained for that area;(d) the extent (if any) of any arrangements for provisions specified in Schedule 4 to be applied to designated persons employed by the [F428local policing body]; and(e) the respects in which any community safety accreditation scheme that is maintained or proposed will be supplementing those arrangements during the period to which the plan relates.(8) A community safety accreditation scheme must contain provision for the making of arrangements with employers who—(a) are carrying on business in the police area in question, or(b) are carrying on business in relation to the whole or any part of that area or in relation to places situated within it,for those employers to supervise the carrying out by their employees of the community safety functions for the purposes of which powers are conferred on those employees by means of accreditations under section 41.(9) It shall be the duty of a chief officer of police who establishes and maintains a community safety accreditation scheme to ensure that the employers of the persons on whom powers are conferred by the grant of accreditations under section 41 have established and maintain satisfactory arrangements for handling complaints relating(1) 
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)	97Part 4 – Police powers etc.Chapter 1 – Exercise of police powers etc. by civilians Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesto the carrying out by those persons of the functions for the purposes of which the powers are conferred.41 Accreditation under community safety accreditation schemes(1) This section applies where a chief officer of police has, for the purposes of a community safety accreditation scheme, entered into any arrangements with any employer for or with respect to the carrying out of community safety functions by employees of that employer.(2) The chief officer of police may, on the making of an application for the purpose by such person and in such manner as he may require, grant accreditation under this section to any employee of the employer.(3) Schedule 5 (which sets out the powers that may be conferred on accredited persons) shall have effect.(4) A chief officer of police shall not grant accreditation to a person under this section unless he is satisfied—(a) that that person’s employer is a fit and proper person to supervise the carrying out of the functions for the purposes of which the accreditation is to be granted;(b) that the person himself is a suitable person to exercise the powers that will be conferred on him by virtue of the accreditation;(c) that that person is capable of effectively carrying out the functions for the purposes of which those powers are to be conferred on him; and(d) that that person has received adequate training for the exercise of those powers.[F429(4A) A chief officer of police may not grant accreditation under this section to a weights and measures inspector.](5) A chief officer of police may charge such fee as he considers appropriate for one or both of the following—(1) 
98	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)Part 4 – Police powers etc.Chapter 1 – Exercise of police powers etc. by civiliansDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(a) considering an application for or for the renewal of an accreditation under this section;(b) granting such an accreditation.(6) A person authorised or required to do anything by virtue of an accreditation under this section—(a) shall not be authorised or required by virtue of that accreditation to engage in any conduct otherwise than in the course of his employment by the employer with whom the chief officer of police has entered into the arrangements mentioned in subsection (1); and(b) shall be so authorised or required subject to such other restrictions and conditions (if any) as may be specified in his accreditation.(7) An accreditation under this section, unless it is previously withdrawn or ceases to have effect in accordance with subsection (8), shall remain in force for such period as may be specified in the accreditation; but it may be renewed at any time with effect from the time when it would otherwise expire.(8) An accreditation under this section shall cease to have effect—(a) if the accredited person ceases to be an employee of the person with whom the chief officer of police has entered into the arrangements mentioned in subsection (1); or(b) if those arrangements are terminated or expire.[F43041A Accreditation of weights and measures inspectors(1) The chief officer of police of any police force may, on the making of an application for the purpose by such person and in such manner as he may require, grant accreditation under this section to a weights and measures inspector.(2) A weights and measures inspector to whom an accreditation under this section is granted by a chief officer of police may exercise the powers conferred by the accreditation in the chief officer's police area.(3) Schedule 5A (which sets out the powers that may be conferred on inspectors accredited under this section) shall have effect.(4) A chief officer of police shall not grant accreditation to a weights and measures inspector under this section unless he is satisfied that—(a) the inspector is a suitable person to exercise the powers that will be conferred on him by virtue of the accreditation; and(b) the inspector has received adequate training for the exercise of those powers.(5) A chief officer of police may charge such fee as he considers appropriate for one or both of the following—(a) considering an application for or for the renewal of an accreditation under this section;(a) 
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)	99Part 4 – Police powers etc.Chapter 1 – Exercise of police powers etc. by civilians Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(b) granting an accreditation under this section.(6) A weights and measures inspector authorised or required to do anything by virtue of an accreditation under this section—(a) shall not be authorised or required by virtue of that accreditation to engage in any conduct otherwise than in the course of his duties as a weights and measures inspector; and(b) shall be so authorised or required subject to such other restrictions and conditions (if any) as may be specified in his accreditation.(7) An accreditation under this section, unless it is previously withdrawn or ceases to have effect in accordance with subsection (8), shall remain in force for such period as may be specified in the accreditation, but it may be renewed at any time with effect from the time when it would otherwise expire.(8) An accreditation under this section shall cease to have effect if the accredited inspector ceases to hold office as a weights and measures inspector.][F43141B Power to apply accreditation provisions(1) The Secretary of State may by order provide for section 41A and any other provision of this Chapter relating to accredited inspectors to apply (with or without modification) in relation to persons of a description specified in the order.(2) The provision which may be made by an order under this section includes such modifications of other enactments as appear to the Secretary of State to be necessary or appropriate.(3) No order shall be made under this section unless a draft of it has been laid before and approved by a resolution of each House of Parliament.]42 Supplementary provisions relating to designations and accreditationsF432(A1) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .F432(B1) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .F432(C1) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .(1) A person who exercises or performs any power or duty in relation to any person in reliance on his designation under section 38 [F433, 38B] or 39 or his accreditation under section 41 [F434or 41A], or who purports to do so, shall produce that designation or accreditation to that person, if requested to do so.(1) 
100	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)Part 4 – Police powers etc.Chapter 1 – Exercise of police powers etc. by civiliansDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesF435(1A) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .(2) A power exercisable by any person in reliance on his designation by a chief officer of police under section 38 or 39 or his accreditation under section 41 shall [F436, subject to subsection (2A),] be exercisable only by a person wearing such uniform as may be—(a) determined or approved for the purposes of this Chapter by the chief officer of police who granted the designation or accreditation; and(b) identified or described in the designation or accreditation;and, in the case of an accredited person, such a power shall be exercisable only if he is also wearing such badge as may be specified for the purposes of this subsection by the Secretary of State, and is wearing it in such manner, or in such place, as may be so specified.[F437(2ZA) A power exercisable by any person in reliance on a designation under section 38B by the chief officer of police of the assisted force shall, subject to subsection (2A), be exercisable only by a person wearing such uniform as may be—(a) determined or approved for the purposes of this Chapter by the chief officer of police of the assisting police force; and(b) identified or described in the designation.In this subsection, “assisted force” and “assisting force” have the same meanings as in section 38B.][F438(2A) A police officer of or above the rank of inspector may direct a particular [F439policing support officer or policing support volunteer] not to wear a uniform for the purposes of a particular operation; and if he so directs, subsection (2) [F440or (2ZA)] shall not apply in relation to that [F439policing support officer or policing support volunteer] for the purposes of that operation.(2B) In subsection (2A), [F441 “policing support officer” and “policing support volunteer” mean (respectively) a person designated as a policing support officer or (as the case may be) a policing support volunteer] under section 38 [F442(in relation to subsection (2)) or section 38B (in relation to subsection (2ZA))] by the chief officer of police of the same force as the officer giving the direction.](3) A chief officer of police who has granted a designation or accreditation to any person under section 38 [F443, 38B], 39 or 41 [F444or an accreditation to any weights and measures inspector under section 41A] may at any time, by notice to the designated or accredited person [F445or the accredited inspector], modify or withdraw that designation or accreditation.F446(4) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .(5) Where any person’s designation under section 39 is modified or withdrawn, the chief officer giving notice of the modification or withdrawal shall send a copy of the notice to the contractor responsible for supervising that person in the carrying out of the functions for the purposes of which the designation was granted.(6) Where any person’s accreditation under section 41 is modified or withdrawn, the chief officer giving notice of the modification or withdrawal shall send a copy of the notice to the employer responsible for supervising that person in the carrying out of the functions for the purposes of which the accreditation was granted.[F447(6A) Where the accreditation of a weights and measures inspector under section 41A is modified or withdrawn, the chief officer giving notice of the modification or
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30) Part 4 – Police powers etc.Chapter 1 – Exercise of police powers etc. by civilians Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
101
withdrawal shall send a copy of the notice to the local weights and measures authority by which the inspector was appointed.](7) For the purposes of determining liability for the unlawful conduct of employees of a [F448chief officer of police or local policing body], conduct by such an employee in reliance or purported reliance on a designation under section 38 shall be taken to be conduct in the course of his employment by the [F448chief officer of police or local policing body]; and, in the case of a tort, [F449that chief officer or body] shall fall to be treated as a joint tortfeasor accordingly.[F450(7A) For the purposes of determining liability for the unlawful conduct of a civilian employee of a police force (within the meaning of section 38B), conduct by such an employee in reliance or purported reliance on a designation under section 38B shall be taken to be conduct in the course of the employee's employment by the employer; and, in the case of a tort, that employer shall fall to be treated as a joint tortfeasor accordingly.][F451(7B) For the purposes of determining liability for the unlawful conduct of police volunteers designated under section 38, conduct by such a volunteer in reliance or purported reliance on a designation under that section is to be taken to be conduct by that person in the course of employment by the chief officer of police by whom the designation is made; and, in the case of a tort, that chief officer is to be treated as a joint tortfeasor accordingly.(7C) For the purposes of determining liability for the unlawful conduct of police volunteers designated under section 38, conduct by such a volunteer in reliance or purported reliance on a designation under section 38B is to be taken to be conduct by that person in the course of employment by the chief officer of police by whom the designation under section 38 is made; and, in the case of a tort, that chief officer is to be treated as a joint tortfeasor accordingly.]F446(8) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .(9) For the purposes of determining liability for the unlawful conduct of employees of a contractor (within the meaning of section 39), conduct by such an employee in reliance or purported reliance on a designation under that section shall be taken to be conduct in the course of his employment by that contractor; and, in the case of a tort, that contractor shall fall to be treated as a joint tortfeasor accordingly.(10) For the purposes of determining liability for the unlawful conduct of employees of a person with whom a chief officer of police has entered into any arrangements for the purposes of a community safety accreditation scheme, conduct by such an employee in reliance or purported reliance on an accreditation under section 41 shall be taken to be conduct in the course of his employment by that employer; and, in the case of a tort, that employer shall fall to be treated as a joint tortfeasor accordingly.[F452(11) For the purposes of determining liability for the unlawful conduct of weights and measures inspectors, conduct by such an inspector in reliance or purported reliance on an accreditation under section 41A shall be taken to be conduct in the course of his duties as a weights and measures inspector; and, in the case of a tort, the local weights and measures authority by which he was appointed shall fall to be treated as a joint tortfeasor accordingly.]
102	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)Part 4 – Police powers etc.Chapter 1 – Exercise of police powers etc. by civiliansDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesTextual AmendmentsF432 S. 42(A1)-(C1) omitted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 15.12.2017 in so far as not already in force) by virtue of Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 12 para. 2(2)(b); S.I. 2017/1139, reg. 2(k) (as amended by S.I. 2017/1162, reg. 2)F433 Word in s. 42(1) inserted (16.1.2012) by Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13), s.157(1), Sch. 13 para. 4(2); S.I. 2011/3019, art. 3, Sch. 1F434 Words in s. 42(1) inserted (1.4.2007) by Police and Justice Act 2006 (c. 48), ss. 52, 53, Sch. 14 para.43(2); S.I. 2007/709, art. 3(p) (subject to arts. 6,7)F435 S. 42(1A) omitted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 15.12.2017 in so far as not already in force) by virtue of Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 12 para. 2(2)(b); S.I. 2017/1139, reg. 2(k) (as amended by S.I. 2017/1162, reg. 2)F436 Words in s. 42(2) inserted (1.7.2005 for certain purposes and 1.8.2005 otherwise) by Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15), ss. 122(2)(a), 178; S.I. 2005/1521, art. 3(1)(h); S.I. 2005/2026, art. 2(d)F437 S. 42(2ZA) inserted (16.1.2012) by Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13), s.157(1), Sch. 13 para. 4(3); S.I. 2011/3019, art. 3, Sch. 1F438 S. 42(2A)(2B) inserted (1.7.2005 for certain purposes and 1.8.2005 otherwise) by Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15), ss. 122(2)(b), 178; S.I. 2005/1521, art. 3(1)(h); S.I. 2005/2026,art. 2(d)F439 Words in s. 42(2A) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 15.12.2017 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 12 para. 2(3); S.I. 2017/1139, reg. 2(k) (as amended by S.I. 2017/1162, reg. 2)F440 Words in s. 42(2A) inserted (16.1.2012) by Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13),s. 157(1), Sch. 13 para. 4(4); S.I. 2011/3019, art. 3, Sch. 1F441 Words in s. 42(2B) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 15.12.2017 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 12 para. 2(4); S.I. 2017/1139, reg. 2(k) (as amended by S.I. 2017/1162, reg. 2)F442 Words in s. 42(2B) inserted (16.1.2012) by Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13),s. 157(1), Sch. 13 para. 4(5); S.I. 2011/3019, art. 3, Sch. 1F443 Word in s. 42(3) inserted (16.1.2012) by Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13), s.157(1), Sch. 13 para. 4(6); S.I. 2011/3019, art. 3, Sch. 1F444 Words in s. 42(3) inserted (1.4.2007) by Police and Justice Act 2006 (c. 48), ss. 52, 53, Sch. 14 para.43(3)(a); S.I. 2007/709, art. 3(p) (subject to arts. 6, 7)F445 Words in s. 42(3) inserted (1.4.2007) by Police and Justice Act 2006 (c. 48), ss. 52, 53, Sch. 14 para.43(3)(b); S.I. 2007/709, art. 3(p) (subject to arts. 6, 7)F446 S. 42(4)(8) repealed (1.4.2006) by Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15), ss. 59, 174,178, Sch. 4 para. 182, Sch. 17 Pt. 2; S.I. 2006/378, art. 4(1), Sch. paras. 10, 12, 13(oo) (subject to art.4(2)-(7))F447 S. 42(6A) inserted (1.4.2007) by Police and Justice Act 2006 (c. 48), ss. 52, 53, Sch. 14 para. 43(4);S.I. 2007/709, art. 3(p) (subject to arts. 6, 7)F448 Words in s. 42(7) substituted (16.1.2012) by Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13),s. 157(1), Sch. 16 para. 296(a); S.I. 2011/3019, art. 3, Sch. 1F449 Words in s. 42(7) substituted (16.1.2012) by Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13),s. 157(1), Sch. 16 para. 296(b); S.I. 2011/3019, art. 3, Sch. 1F450 S. 42(7A) inserted (16.1.2012) by Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13), s. 157(1),Sch. 13 para. 4(7); S.I. 2011/3019, art. 3, Sch. 1F451 S. 42(7B)(7C) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 15.12.2017 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 12 para. 2(5); S.I. 2017/1139, reg. 2(k) (as amended by S.I. 2017/1162, reg. 2)F452 S. 42(11) inserted (1.4.2007) by Police and Justice Act 2006 (c. 48), ss. 52, 53, Sch. 14 para. 43(5);S.I. 2007/709, art. 3(p) (subject to arts. 6, 7)
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30) Part 4 – Police powers etc.Chapter 1 – Exercise of police powers etc. by civilians Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
103
43 Railway safety accreditation scheme(1) The Secretary of State may make regulations for the purpose of enabling the chief constable of the British Transport Police Force to establish and maintain a scheme (“a railway safety accreditation scheme”).[F453(2) A railway safety accreditation scheme is a scheme for the exercise, within a place specified in section 31(1)(a) to (f) of the Railways and Transport Safety Act 2003 in England and Wales, by persons accredited by the chief constable of the British Transport Police Force under the scheme, of the powers conferred on those persons by their accreditation under that scheme.](3) The regulations may make provision—(a) as to the purposes for which a railway safety accreditation scheme may be established;(b) as to the procedure to be followed in the establishment of such a scheme; and(c) as to matters for which such a scheme must contain provision.(4) The regulations may make provision as to the descriptions of persons who may be accredited under a railway safety accreditation scheme and as to the procedure and criteria to be applied for the grant of any accreditation under such a scheme.(5) The regulations may make provision as to the powers which may be conferred on a person by an accreditation under such a scheme.(6) Subject to subsection (7), no regulations made by virtue of subsection (5) shall permit a power to be conferred on a person accredited under a railway safety accreditation scheme which could not be conferred on an accredited person under a community safety accreditation scheme.(7) The regulations may provide that the powers which may be conferred on a person by an accreditation under a railway safety accreditation scheme include the powers of a constable F454... to give a penalty notice under Chapter 1 of Part 1 of the Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (fixed penalty notices) in respect of the following offences—(a) an offence under section 55 of the British Transport Commission Act 1949 (c. xxix) (trespassing on a railway);(b) an offence under section 56 of that Act (throwing stones etc. at trains or other things on railways).(8) In relation to a person accredited under a railway safety accreditation scheme, the regulations may apply, with such modifications as may be prescribed by them, any provision of this Chapter which applies in relation to an accredited person.(3) 
104	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)Part 4 – Police powers etc.Chapter 1 – Exercise of police powers etc. by civiliansDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(9) Before making regulations under this section the Secretary of State shall consult with—(a) [F455the National Police Chiefs' Council];(b) the chief constable of the British Transport Police Force;[F456(c)	such persons as appear to the Secretary of State to represent the views of police and crime commissioners;(ca)	the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime;(cb)	the Common Council of the City of London; and](d) the [F457British Transport Police Authority] ;(e) persons whom he considers to represent the interests of local authorities;(f) the Mayor of London; and(g) such other persons as he thinks fit.(10) In this section—  “local authorities” means district councils, London borough councils, county councils in Wales, county borough councils and the Common Council of the City of London; andF458. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .F45944	Removal of restriction on powers conferred on traffic wardens. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30) Part 4 – Police powers etc.Chapter 1 – Exercise of police powers etc. by civilians Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesF46045	Code of practice relating to chief officers’ powers under Chapter 1. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
105
46 Offences against designated and accredited persons etc.(1) Any person who assaults—(a) a designated person in the execution of his duty,(b) an accredited person in the execution of his duty,[F461(ba)  an accredited inspector in the execution of his duty,] or(c) a person assisting a designated or accredited person [F462or an accredited inspector] in the execution of his duty,is guilty of an offence and shall be liable, on summary conviction, to imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months or to a fine not exceeding level 5 on the standard scale, or to both.(2) Any person who resists or wilfully obstructs—(a) a designated person in the execution of his duty,(b) an accredited person in the execution of his duty,[F463(ba)  an accredited inspector in the execution of his duty,] or(c) a person assisting a designated or accredited person [F462or an accredited inspector] in the execution of his duty,is guilty of an offence and shall be liable, on summary conviction, to imprisonment for a term not exceeding one month or to a fine not exceeding level 3 on the standard scale, or to both.(3) Any person who, with intent to deceive—(a) impersonates a designated person [F464, an accredited person or an accredited inspector] ,(b) makes any statement or does any act calculated falsely to suggest that he is a designated person [F465, that he is an accredited person or that he is an accredited inspector] , or(c) makes any statement or does any act calculated falsely to suggest that he has powers as a designated or accredited person [F466or as an accredited inspector] that exceed the powers he actually has,is guilty of an offence and shall be liable, on summary conviction, to imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months or to a fine not exceeding level 5 on the standard scale, or to both.(4) In this section references to the execution by a designated person [F467, accredited person or accredited inspector] of his duty are references to his exercising any power or performing any duty which is his by virtue of his designation or accreditation.[F468(5) References in this section to a designated person are to—(a) a designated person within the meaning given by section 47(1), and(a) 
106	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)Part 4 – Police powers etc.Chapter 1 – Exercise of police powers etc. by civiliansDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(b) a person in relation to whom a designation under section 38B is for the time being in force.]47 Interpretation of Chapter 1(1) In this Chapter—  [F469“accredited inspector” means a weights and measures inspector in relation to whom an accreditation under section 41A is for the time being in force;]  “accredited person” means a person in relation to whom an accreditation under section 41 is for the time being in force;  “community safety functions” means any functions the carrying out of which would be facilitated by the ability to exercise one or more of the powers mentioned in Schedule 5;“conduct” includes omissions and statements;  “designated person” means a person in relation to whom a designation under section 38 or 39 is for the time being in force;F470. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .F471. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  [F472“weights and measures inspector” means an inspector of weights and measures appointed under section 72(1) of the Weights and Measures Act 1985.](2) In this Chapter—(a) references to carrying on business include references to carrying out functions under any enactment; and(a) 
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30) Part 4 – Police powers etc.Chapter 2 – Provisions modifying and supplementing police powers Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
107
(b) references to the employees of a person carrying on business include references to persons holding office under a person, and references to employers shall be construed accordingly.CHAPTER 2PROVISIONS MODIFYING AND SUPPLEMENTING POLICE POWERSPowers of arrest48 Offences for which a person may be arrested without a warrantF473. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .49 Power of arrest in relation to failure to stop a vehicle(1) F474. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .(2) In section 17(1)(c) of the 1984 Act (power of entry to effect arrest for certain offences), after sub-paragraph (iii) there shall be inserted—“(iiia) section 163 of the Road Traffic Act 1988 (c. 52) (failure to stop when required to do so by a constable in uniform);”.(3) This section has no effect in relation to offences committed before its commencement.(1) 
108	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)Part 4 – Police powers etc.Chapter 2 – Provisions modifying and supplementing police powersDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesPower to require name and address50 Persons [F475engaging in anti-social behaviour](1) If a constable in uniform has reason to believe that a person [F476has engaged, or is engaging, in anti-social behaviour]F477..., he may require that person to give his name and address to the constable.[F478(1A) In subsection (1) “anti-social behaviour” has the meaning given by section 2 of the Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (ignoring subsection (2) of that section).](2) Any person who—(a) fails to give his name and address when required to do so under subsection (1), or(b) gives a false or inaccurate name or address in response to a requirement under that subsection,is guilty of an offence and shall be liable, on summary conviction, to a fine not exceeding level 3 on the standard scale.Persons in police detention51 Independent custody visitors for places of detention(1) Every [F479local policing body] shall—(a) make arrangements for detainees to be visited by persons appointed under the arrangements (“independent custody visitors”); and(b) keep those arrangements under review and from time to time revise them as they think fit.[F480(1A) Every [F481local policing body] must ensure—
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30) Part 4 – Police powers etc.Chapter 2 – Provisions modifying and supplementing police powers Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
109
(a) that the arrangements made by it require independent custody visitors to prepare and submit to it a report of any visit made under the arrangements to a suspected terrorist detainee, and(b) that a copy of any report submitted under paragraph (a) is given to the person appointed under section 36(1) of the Terrorism Act 2006 (independent reviewer of terrorism legislation).](2) The arrangements must secure that the persons appointed under the arrangements are independent of both—(a) the [F482local policing body]; and(b) the chief officer of police of the police force maintained by [F483that body].(3) The arrangements may confer on independent custody visitors such powers as the [F484local policing body] considers necessary to enable them to carry out their functions under the arrangements and may, in particular, confer on them powers—(a) to require access to be given to each police station;(b) to examine records relating to the detention of persons there;[F485(ba)  in relation to suspected terrorist detainees, to listen to the audio recordings and view the video recordings (with or without sound) of interviews with those detainees which have taken place during their detention there and which were conducted by a constable;](c) to meet detainees there for the purposes of a discussion about their treatment and conditions while detained; and(d) to inspect the facilities there including in particular, cell accommodation, washing and toilet facilities and the facilities for the provision of food.[F486(3A) The arrangements may include provision for access to the whole or part of an audio or video recording of an interview of the kind mentioned in subsection (3)(ba) to be denied to independent custody visitors if—(a) it appears to an officer of or above the rank of inspector that there are grounds for denying access at the time it is requested;(b) the grounds are grounds specified for the purposes of paragraph (a) in the arrangements; and(c) the procedural requirements imposed by the arrangements in relation to a denial of access to such recordings are complied with.(3B) Grounds are not to be specified in any arrangements for the purposes of subsection (3A)(a) unless they are grounds for the time being set out for the purposes of this subsection in the code of practice issued by the Secretary of State under subsection (6).](4) The arrangements may include provision for access to a detainee to be denied to independent custody visitors if—(a) it appears to an officer of or above the rank of inspector that there are grounds for denying access at the time it is requested;(b) the grounds are grounds specified for the purposes of paragraph (a) in the arrangements; and(c) the procedural requirements imposed by the arrangements in relation to a denial of access are complied with.(a) 
110	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)Part 4 – Police powers etc.Chapter 2 – Provisions modifying and supplementing police powersDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(5) Grounds shall not be specified in any arrangements for the purposes of subsection (4)(a) unless they are grounds for the time being set out for the purposes of this subsection in the code of practice issued by the Secretary of State under subsection (6).(6) The Secretary of State shall issue, and may from time to time revise, a code of practice as to the carrying out by [F487local policing bodies] and independent custody visitors of their functions under the arrangements.(7) Before issuing or revising a code of practice under this section, the Secretary of State shall consult with—[F488[F489(a)	such persons as appear to the Secretary of State to represent the views of police and crime commissioners;(aa)	the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime; (ab)	the Common Council of the City of London;](b) [F490the National Police Chiefs' Council]; and](c) such other persons as he thinks fit.(8) The Secretary of State shall lay any code of practice issued by him under this section, and any revisions of any such code, before Parliament.(9) [F491Local policing bodies] and independent custody visitors shall have regard to the code of practice for the time being in force under subsection (6) in the carrying out of their functions under the preceding provisions of this section.[F492(10) In this section—  “detainee”, in relation to arrangements made under this section, means a person detained in a police station in the police area of the [F493local policing body];  “suspected terrorist detainee” means a detainee detained under section 41 of the Terrorism Act 2000.]
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30) Part 4 – Police powers etc.Chapter 2 – Provisions modifying and supplementing police powers Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
111
52 Detention reviews for detained persons who are asleep(1) In section 40 of the 1984 Act (review of police detention), in subsection (8) for the words from “the substitution” to the end there shall be substituted “ the modifications specified in subsection (8A) ”.(2) After that subsection there shall be inserted— “(8A) The modifications are—(a) the substitution of references to the person whose detention is under review for references to the person arrested;(b) the substitution of references to the review officer for references to the custody officer; and(c) in subsection (6), the insertion of the following paragraph after paragraph (a)—(“) asleep;””(3) In subsection (10) of that section—(a) for “(6)” there shall be substituted “ (6B) ”; and(b) for the words from “the substitution” to the end there shall be substituted “ the modifications specified in subsection (10A) ”.(4) After that subsection there shall be inserted— “(10A) The modifications are—(a) the substitution of a reference to the person whose detention is under review for any reference to the person arrested or to the person charged; and(b) in subsection (5), the insertion of the following paragraph after paragraph (a)—(“) asleep;””53 Persons suspected of offences connected with transport systems(1) In section 34(6) of the 1984 Act (persons treated as arrested for an offence), after “1988” there shall be inserted “ or section 30(2) of the Transport and Works Act 1992 (c. 42) ”.(1) 
112	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)Part 4 – Police powers etc.Chapter 2 – Provisions modifying and supplementing police powersDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(2) In section 62(11) of that Act (provisions of the Road Traffic Act 1988 (c. 52) relating to the taking of specimens not to be affected by provisions of that section)—(a) for “affects” there shall be substituted “ applies to the taking of a specimen for the purposes of any of the provisions of ”; and(b) after “Road Traffic Act 1988” there shall be inserted “ or of sections 26 to 38 of the Transport and Works Act 1992 ”.Blood specimens54 Persons authorised to take intimate samples from persons in police detention(1) For subsection (9) of section 62 of the 1984 Act (persons who may take intimate samples) there shall be substituted—“(9) In the case of an intimate sample which is a dental impression, the sample may be taken from a person only by a registered dentist.(9A) In the case of any other form of intimate sample, except in the case of a sample of urine, the sample may be taken from a person only by—(a) a registered medical practitioner; or(b) a registered health care professional.”(2) In section 65 of the 1984 Act (interpretation of Part 5 of that Act), in subsection (1) after the definition of “registered dentist” there shall be inserted—““registered health care professional” means a person (other than a medical practitioner) who is—(a) a registered nurse; or(b) a registered member of a health care profession which is designated for the purposes of this paragraph by an order made by the Secretary of State;”.(3) After that subsection, there shall be inserted—“(1A) A health care profession is any profession mentioned in section 60(2) of the Health Act 1999 (c. 8) other than the profession of practising medicine and the profession of nursing.(1B) An order under subsection (1) shall be made by statutory instrument and shall be subject to annulment in pursuance of a resolution of either House of Parliament.”55 Extension of role of health care professionals(1) In subsection (4) of section 7 of the Road Traffic Act 1988 (constable to decide if specimen is of blood or urine) for the words from “shall be decided” onwards there(1) 
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30) Part 4 – Police powers etc.Chapter 2 – Provisions modifying and supplementing police powers Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
113
shall be substituted “ and, in the case of a specimen of blood, the question who is to be asked to take it shall be decided (subject to subsection (4A)) by the constable making the requirement ”.(2) After that subsection there shall be inserted—“(4A) Where a constable decides for the purposes of subsection (4) to require the provision of a specimen of blood, there shall be no requirement to provide such a specimen if—(a) the medical practitioner who is asked to take the specimen is of the opinion that, for medical reasons, it cannot or should not be taken; or(b) the registered health care professional who is asked to take it is of that opinion and there is no contrary opinion from a medical practitioner;and, where by virtue of this subsection there can be no requirement to provide a specimen of blood, the constable may require a specimen of urine instead.”(3) In subsection (2) of section 11 of that Act (interpretation of sections 3A to 10 of that Act), after the definition of “prescribed limit” there shall be inserted—““registered health care professional” means a person (other than a medical practitioner) who is—(a) a registered nurse; or(b) a registered member of a health care profession which is designated for the purposes of this paragraph by an order made by the Secretary of State.”(4) After that subsection there shall be inserted—“(2A) A health care profession is any profession mentioned in section 60(2) of the Health Act 1999 (c. 8) other than the profession of practising medicine and the profession of nursing.(2B) An order under subsection (2) shall be made by statutory instrument; and any such statutory instrument shall be subject to annulment in pursuance of a resolution of either House of Parliament.”(5) For subsection (4) of that section there shall be substituted— “(4) A person provides a specimen of blood if and only if—(a) he consents to the taking of such a specimen from him; and(b) the specimen is taken from him by a medical practitioner or, if it is taken in a police station, either by a medical practitioner or by a registered health care professional.”56 Specimens taken from persons incapable of consenting(1) After section 7 of the Road Traffic Act 1988 (c. 52) there shall be inserted—(1) 
114	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)Part 4 – Police powers etc.Chapter 2 – Provisions modifying and supplementing police powersDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes“7A Specimens of blood taken from persons incapable of consenting(1) A constable may make a request to a medical practitioner for him to take a specimen of blood from a person (“the person concerned”) irrespective of whether that person consents if—(a) that person is a person from whom the constable would (in the absence of any incapacity of that person and of any objection under section 9) be entitled under section 7 to require the provision of a specimen of blood for a laboratory test;(b) it appears to that constable that that person has been involved in an accident that constitutes or is comprised in the matter that is under investigation or the circumstances of that matter;(c) it appears to that constable that that person is or may be incapable (whether or not he has purported to do so) of giving a valid consent to the taking of a specimen of blood; and(d) it appears to that constable that that person’s incapacity is attributable to medical reasons.(2) A request under this section—(a) shall not be made to a medical practitioner who for the time being has any responsibility (apart from the request) for the clinical care of the person concerned; and(b) shall not be made to a medical practitioner other than a police medical practitioner unless—(i) it is not reasonably practicable for the request to made to a police medical practitioner; or(ii) it is not reasonably practicable for such a medical practitioner (assuming him to be willing to do so) to take the specimen.(3) It shall be lawful for a medical practitioner to whom a request is made under this section, if he thinks fit—(a) to take a specimen of blood from the person concerned irrespective of whether that person consents; and(b) to provide the sample to a constable.(4) If a specimen is taken in pursuance of a request under this section, the specimen shall not be subjected to a laboratory test unless the person from whom it was taken—(a) has been informed that it was taken; and(b) has been required by a constable to give his permission for a laboratory test of the specimen; and(c) has given his permission.(5) A constable must, on requiring a person to give his permission for the purposes of this section for a laboratory test of a specimen, warn that person that a failure to give the permission may render him liable to prosecution.(6) A person who, without reasonable excuse, fails to give his permission for a laboratory test of a specimen of blood taken from him under this section is guilty of an offence.(1) 
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30) Part 4 – Police powers etc.Chapter 2 – Provisions modifying and supplementing police powers Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
115
(7) In this section “police medical practitioner” means a medical practitioner who is engaged under any agreement to provide medical services for purposes connected with the activities of a police force.”(2) In section 9 of that Act (protection of hospital patients), for subsection (2) there shall be substituted—“(1A) While a person is at a hospital as a patient, no specimen of blood shall be taken from him under section 7A of this Act and he shall not be required to give his permission for a laboratory test of a specimen taken under that section unless the medical practitioner in immediate charge of his case—(a) has been notified of the proposal to take the specimen or to make the requirement; and(b) has not objected on the ground specified in subsection (2).(2) The ground on which the medical practitioner may object is—(a) in a case falling within subsection (1), that the requirement or the provision of the specimen or (if one is required) the warning required by section 7(7) of this Act would be prejudicial to the proper care and treatment of the patient; and(b) in a case falling within subsection (1A), that the taking of the specimen, the requirement or the warning required by section 7A(5) of this Act would be so prejudicial.”(3) In section 34(3) of the Road Traffic Offenders Act 1988 (c. 53) (disqualification for certain offences where offender has previous conviction)—(a) the word “and” at the end of paragraph (b) shall be omitted; and(b) after paragraph (c) there shall be inserted—“(d) section 7A(6) (failing to allow a specimen to be subjected to laboratory test) where that is an offence involving obligatory disqualification;”.(4) In Schedule 1 to the Road Traffic Offenders Act 1988 (offences to which sections 1, 11 and 12(1) of that Act apply), in the Table, after the entry beginning “RTA section 7” there shall be inserted—
“RTA section 7A	Failing to allow specimen of blood to be subjected to laboratory test
Sections 11 and 12(1).”
(5) In Part 1 of Schedule 2 to the Road Traffic Offenders Act 1988 (prosecution and punishment of offences under the Traffic Acts), after the entry beginning “RTA section 7” there shall be inserted—
“RTAsection 7A
Failing to allow specimen to besubjected to laboratory test
Summarily	(a) Wherethe test would be forascertaining ability to drive or proportion
(a) Obligatory in the case mentioned in column 4(a)(b) Discretionary
Obligatory	3-11, incase ment- ioned in column 4(a) 10, in any other case.”
116	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)Part 4 – Police powers etc.Chapter 2 – Provisions modifying and supplementing police powersDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
of alcohol at the time offender was driving or attempting to drive, 6 months or level 5 onthe standard scale or both.(b) In any other case, 3 months orlevel 4 on the standard scale or bothF494(6) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
in any other case
57 Use of specimens taken from persons incapable of consenting(1) In subsection (2) of section 15 of the Road Traffic Offenders Act 1988 (c. 53) (evidence of blood alcohol level)—(a) after “provided by” there shall be inserted “ or taken from ”; and(b) after the word “provided”, in the second place where it occurs, there shall be inserted “ or taken ”.(2) In subsection (3)(a) of that section (rebutting the assumption in subsection (2)), after “provided the specimen” there shall be inserted “ or had it taken from him ”.(3) In subsection (4) of that section (circumstances in which a specimen of blood is to be disregarded), for the words from “unless” to the end there shall be substituted “unless—(a) it was taken from the accused with his consent and either—(i) in a police station by a medical practitioner or a registered health care professional; or(ii) elsewhere by a medical practitioner;or(b) it was taken from the accused by a medical practitioner under section 7A of the Road Traffic Act 1988 and the accused subsequently gave his permission for a laboratory test of the specimen.”(4) After subsection (5) of that section, there shall be inserted—(1) 
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30) Part 4 – Police powers etc.Chapter 2 – Provisions modifying and supplementing police powers Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
117
“(5A) Where a specimen of blood was taken from the accused under section 7A of the Road Traffic Act 1988, evidence of the proportion of alcohol or any drug found in the specimen is not admissible on behalf of the prosecution unless—(a) the specimen in which the alcohol or drug was found is one of two parts into which the specimen taken from the accused was divided at the time it was taken; and(b) any request to be supplied with the other part which was made by the accused at the time when he gave his permission for a laboratory test of the specimen was complied with.”(5) In subsection (1) of section 16 of that Act (documentary evidence as to specimens), after “15(5)” there shall be inserted “ and (5A) ”.(6) In subsection (2) of that section (documentary evidence as to consent), after the words “medical practitioner”, in both places where they occur, there shall be inserted “ or a registered health care professional ”.58 Equivalent provision for offences connected with transport systems(1) In subsection (6) of section 31 of the Transport and Works Act 1992 (c. 42) (constable to decide if specimen is of blood or urine), for the words from “shall be decided” onwards there shall be substituted “ and, in the case of a specimen of blood, the question who is to be asked to take it shall be decided (subject to subsection (6A)) by the constable making the requirement ”.(2) After that subsection there shall be inserted—“(6A) Where a constable decides for the purposes of subsection (6) to require the provision of a specimen of blood, there shall be no requirement to provide such a specimen if—(a) the medical practitioner who is asked to take the specimen is of the opinion that, for medical reasons, it cannot or should not be taken; or(b) the registered health care professional who is asked to take it is of that opinion and there is no contrary opinion from a medical practitioner,and, where by virtue of this subsection there can be no requirement to provide a specimen of blood, the constable may require a specimen of urine instead.”(3) After subsection (9) of that section there shall be inserted—“(9A) In this section “health care professional” means a person (other than a medical practitioner) who is—(a) a registered nurse; or(b) a registered member of a health care profession which is designated for the purposes of this paragraph by an order made by the Secretary of State.(a) 
118	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)Part 4 – Police powers etc.Chapter 2 – Provisions modifying and supplementing police powersDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(9B) A health care profession is any profession mentioned in section 60(2) of the Health Act 1999 (c. 8) other than the profession of practising medicine and the profession of nursing.(9C) An order under subsection (9A)(b) shall be made by statutory instrument; and any such statutory instrument shall be subject to annulment in pursuance of a resolution of either House of Parliament.”(4) After section 31 of that Act there shall be inserted—“31A Specimens of blood taken from persons incapable of consenting(1) A constable may make a request to a medical practitioner for him to take a specimen of blood from a person (“the person concerned”) irrespective of whether that person consents if—(a) that person is a person from whom the constable would (in the absence of any incapacity of that person and of any objection under section 33) be entitled under section 31 to require the provision of a specimen of blood for a laboratory test;(b) it appears to that constable that that person has been involved in—(i) an accident that constitutes or is comprised in the matter that is under investigation or the circumstances of that matter; or(ii) a dangerous incident (within the meaning given by section 29(3)) that constitutes or is comprised in that matter or those circumstances;(c) it appears to that constable that that person is or may be incapable (whether or not he has purported to do so) of giving a valid consent to the taking of a specimen of blood; and(d) it appears to that constable that that person’s incapacity is attributable to medical reasons.(2) A request under this section—(a) shall not be made to a medical practitioner who for the time being has any responsibility (apart from the request) for the clinical care of the person concerned; and(b) shall not be made to a medical practitioner other than a police medical practitioner unless—(i) it is not reasonably practicable for the request to made to a police medical practitioner; or(ii) it is not reasonably practicable for such a medical practitioner (assuming him to be willing to do so) to take the specimen.(3) It shall be lawful for a medical practitioner to whom a request is made under this section, if he thinks fit—(a) to take a specimen of blood from the person concerned irrespective of whether that person consents; and(b) to provide the sample to a constable.(4) If a specimen is taken in pursuance of a request under this section, the specimen shall not be subjected to a laboratory test unless the person from whom it was taken—(1) 
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30) Part 4 – Police powers etc.Chapter 2 – Provisions modifying and supplementing police powers Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
119
(a) has been informed that it was taken; and(b) has been required by a constable to give his permission for a laboratory test of the specimen; and(c) has given his permission.(5) A constable must, on requiring a person to give his permission for the purposes of this section for a laboratory test of a specimen, warn that person that a failure to give the permission, may render him liable to prosecution.(6) A person who, without reasonable excuse, fails to give his permission for a laboratory test of a specimen of blood taken from him under this section is guilty of an offence.(7) In this section “police medical practitioner” means a medical practitioner who is engaged under any agreement to provide medical services for purposes connected with the activities of a police force.”(5) In section 33 of that Act (protection of hospital patients), for subsection (2) there shall be substituted—“(1A) While a person is at a hospital as a patient, no specimen of blood shall be taken from him under section 31A of this Act and he shall not be required to give his permission for a laboratory test of a specimen taken under that section unless the medical practitioner in immediate charge of his case—(a) has been notified of the proposal to take the specimen or to make the requirement; and(b) has not objected on the ground specified in subsection (2).(2) The ground on which the medical practitioner may object is—(a) in a case falling within subsection (1), that the requirement or the provision of the specimen or (if one is required) the warning required by section 31(9) of this Act would be prejudicial to the proper care and treatment of the patient; and(b) in a case falling within subsection (1A), that the taking of the specimen, the requirement or the warning required by section 31A(5) of this Act would be so prejudicial.”(6) In subsection (1)(a) of section 34 of that Act (evidence of blood alcohol level) after “provided by” there shall be inserted “ or taken from ”.(7) In subsection (2)(a) of that section (rebutting the assumption in subsection (1)(b)), after “provided the specimen” there shall be inserted “ or had it taken from him ”.(8) After subsection (3) of that section there shall be substituted—“(3A) Where a specimen of blood was taken from the accused under section 31A, evidence of the proportion of alcohol or any drug found in the specimen is not admissible on behalf of the prosecution in the proceedings unless—(a) the specimen in which the alcohol or drug was found is one of two parts into which the specimen taken from the accused was divided at the time it was taken; and(b) any request to be supplied with the other part which was made by the accused at the time when he gave his permission for a laboratory test of the specimen was complied with.”(a) 
120	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)Part 4 – Police powers etc.Chapter 2 – Provisions modifying and supplementing police powersDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(9) In section 35(3) of that Act (documentary evidence as to consent) after the words “practitioner”, in both places where it occurs, there shall be inserted “ or a registered health care professional ”.(10) After subsection (2) of section 38 of that Act (interpretation of Chapter 1 of Part 2 of that Act) there shall be inserted—“(2A) In this Chapter “registered health care professional” means a person (other than a medical practitioner) who is—(a) a registered nurse; or(b) a registered member of a health care profession which is designated for the purposes of this paragraph by an order made by the Secretary of State.(2B) A health care profession is any profession mentioned in section 60(2) of the Health Act 1999 (c. 8) other than the profession of practising medicine and the profession of nursing.(2C) An order under subsection (2A)(b) shall be made by statutory instrument; and any such statutory instrument shall be subject to annulment in pursuance of a resolution of either House of Parliament.”(11) For subsection (5) of that section there shall be substituted—“(5) For the purposes of this Chapter, a person provides a specimen of blood if and only if—(a) he consents to the taking of such a specimen from him; and(b) the specimen is taken from him by a medical practitioner or, if it is taken in a police station, either by a medical practitioner or by a registered health care professional.”Seizure of motor vehicles59 Vehicles used in manner causing alarm, distress or annoyance(1) Where a constable in uniform has reasonable grounds for believing that a motor vehicle is being used on any occasion in a manner which—(a) contravenes section 3 or 34 of the Road Traffic Act 1988 (c. 52) (careless and inconsiderate driving and prohibition of off-road driving), and(b) is causing, or is likely to cause, alarm, distress or annoyance to members of the public,he shall have the powers set out in subsection (3).(2) A constable in uniform shall also have the powers set out in subsection (3) where he has reasonable grounds for believing that a motor vehicle has been used on any occasion in a manner falling within subsection (1).(1) 
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30) Part 4 – Police powers etc.Chapter 2 – Provisions modifying and supplementing police powers Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
121
(3) Those powers are—(a) power, if the motor vehicle is moving, to order the person driving it to stop the vehicle;(b) power to seize and remove the motor vehicle;(c) power, for the purposes of exercising a power falling within paragraph (a) or (b), to enter any premises on which he has reasonable grounds for believing the motor vehicle to be;(d) power to use reasonable force, if necessary, in the exercise of any power conferred by any of paragraphs to (a) to (c).(4) A constable shall not seize a motor vehicle in the exercise of the powers conferred on him by this section unless—(a) he has warned the person appearing to him to be the person whose use falls within subsection (1) that he will seize it, if that use continues or is repeated; and(b) it appears to him that the use has continued or been repeated after the warning.(5) Subsection (4) does not require a warning to be given by a constable on any occasion on which he would otherwise have the power to seize a motor vehicle under this section if—(a) the circumstances make it impracticable for him to give the warning;(b) the constable has already on that occasion given a warning under that subsection in respect of any use of that motor vehicle or of another motor vehicle by that person or any other person;(c) the constable has reasonable grounds for believing that such a warning has been given on that occasion otherwise than by him; or(d) the constable has reasonable grounds for believing that the person whose use of that motor vehicle on that occasion would justify the seizure is a person to whom a warning under that subsection has been given (whether or not by that constable or in respect the same vehicle or the same or a similar use) on a previous occasion in the previous twelve months.(6) A person who fails to comply with an order under subsection (3)(a) is guilty of an offence and shall be liable, on summary conviction, to a fine not exceeding level 3 on the standard scale.(7) Subsection (3)(c) does not authorise entry into a private dwelling house.(8) The powers conferred on a constable by this section shall be exercisable only at a time when regulations under section 60 are in force.(9) In this section—“driving” has the same meaning as in the Road Traffic Act 1988 (c. 52); “motor vehicle” means any mechanically propelled vehicle, whether or notit is intended or adapted for use on roads; and  “private dwelling house” does not include any garage or other structure occupied with the dwelling house, or any land appurtenant to the dwelling house.60 Retention etc. of vehicles seized under section 59(1) The Secretary of State may by regulations make provision as to—(1) 
122	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)Part 4 – Police powers etc.Chapter 2 – Provisions modifying and supplementing police powersDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(a) the removal and retention of motor vehicles seized under section 59; and(b) the release or disposal of such motor vehicles.(2) Regulations under subsection (1) may, in particular, make provision—(a) for the giving of notice of the seizure of a motor vehicle under section 59 to a person who is the owner of that vehicle or who, in accordance with the regulations, appears to be its owner;(b) for the procedure by which a person who claims to be the owner of a motor vehicle seized under section 59 may seek to have it released;(c) for requiring the payment of fees, charges or costs in relation to the removal and retention of such a motor vehicle and to any application for its release;(d) as to the circumstances in which a motor vehicle seized under section 59 may be disposed of;(e) as to the destination—(i) of any fees or charges payable in accordance with the regulations; and(ii) of the proceeds (if any) arising from the disposal of a motor vehicle seized under section 59;(f) for the delivery to a local authority, in circumstances prescribed by or determined in accordance with the regulations, of any motor vehicle seized under section 59.(3) Regulations under subsection (1) must provide that a person who would otherwise be liable to pay any fee or charge under the regulations shall not be liable to pay it if—(a) the use by reference to which the motor vehicle in question was seized was not a use by him; and(b) he did not know of the use of the vehicle in the manner which led to its seizure, had not consented to its use in that manner and could not, by the taking of reasonable steps, have prevented its use in that manner.(4) In this section—“local authority”—(a) in relation to England, means the council of a county, metropolitan district or London borough, the Common Council of the City of London or Transport for London; and(b) in relation to Wales, means the council of a county or county borough; “motor vehicle” has the same meaning as in section 59.Anti-social behaviourF49561	Anti-social behaviour orders. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30) Part 4 – Police powers etc.Chapter 2 – Provisions modifying and supplementing police powers Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesF49562	Power of Secretary of State to add to relevant authorities. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
123
F49563	Orders in county court proceedings. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .F49564	Orders on conviction in criminal proceedings. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .F49565	Interim orders. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .F49566	Consultation requirements. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
124	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)Part 4 – Police powers etc.Chapter 2 – Provisions modifying and supplementing police powersDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesSex offenders67 Sex offenders: England and WalesF496. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .68 Interim orders for sex offenders: England and WalesF497. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .69 Sex offender orders made in Scotland or Northern IrelandF498. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .70 Sex offenders: ScotlandF499. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .71 Sex offender orders made in England and Wales or Northern IrelandF500. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30) Part 4 – Police powers etc.Chapter 2 – Provisions modifying and supplementing police powers Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
125
72 Sex offenders: Northern IrelandF501. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .73 Interim orders for sex offenders: Northern IrelandF502. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .74 Sex offender orders made in England and Wales or ScotlandF503. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .The British Transport Police75 Removal of truants to designated places(1) In section 16 of the Crime and Disorder Act 1998 (c. 37) (removal of truants to designated place), after subsection (3) there shall be inserted—“(3A) The power of a police officer of or above the rank of superintendent under subsection (2) to specify any area falling within a police area shall be exercisable by such an officer who is a member of the British Transport Police as if the reference in that subsection to an area in the police area were a reference to—(a) any area in or in the vicinity of any policed premises; or(b) the whole or any part of any such premises;and references in subsection (3) to the specified area shall have effect accordingly.”
126	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)Part 4 – Police powers etc.Chapter 2 – Provisions modifying and supplementing police powersDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(2) In subsection (5) of that section (interpretation)—(a) before the definition of “local authority” there shall be inserted—““British Transport Police” means the force of constables appointed under section 53 of the British Transport Commission Act 1949 (c. xxix);”and(b) after the definition of “local authority” there shall be inserted—““policed premises” has the meaning given by section 53(3) of the British Transport Commission Act 1949;”.76 Amendments to Part 3 of the Road Traffic Offenders Act 1988(1) Part 3 of the Road Traffic Offenders Act 1988 (c. 53) (fixed penalties) shall be amended as follows.F504(2) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .(3) In section 75(1) (conditional offers in England and Wales), at the end there shall be inserted “or, if the constable is a member of the British Transport Police, by or on behalf of the chief constable of the British Transport Police.”F505(4) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .(5) In section 87 (guidance from the Secretary of State), after “areas” there shall be inserted “ and to the chief constable of the British Transport Police ”.(6) In section 89 (interpretation of Part 3), after the definition of “authorised person” there shall be inserted—““British Transport Police” means the force of constables appointed under the British Transport Commission Act 1949 (c. xxix);”.Property in possession of NCS77 Application of the Police (Property) Act 1897 to NCS(1) After section 2 of the Police (Property) Act 1897 (c. 30) there shall be inserted—“2A Application to NCS(1) This Act applies to property which has come into the possession of the National Crime Squad as it applies to property that has come into the possession of the police.(1) 
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)Part 5 – The Ministry of Defence PoliceChapter 2 – Provisions modifying and supplementing police powers Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
127
(2) In relation to property that has come into the possession of the National Crime Squad—(a) the reference in section 1(1) to an officer of police is a reference to a member of that Squad; and(b) references in section 2 to the property remaining in the possession of the police are references to its remaining in the possession of that Squad.(3) The power to make regulations under section 2 has effect in relation to property that has come into the possession of the National Crime Squad as if—(a) the relevant authority for the purposes of subsection (2A) of that section were the Service Authority for that Squad; and(b) the reference in subsection (2A)(c) of that section to police purposes were a reference to the purposes of that Squad.”(2) In section (2) of that Act (regulations), for subsection (2B) there shall be substituted—“(2B) The relevant authority for the purposes of subsection (2A) is the police authority.”PART 5THE MINISTRY OF DEFENCE POLICE78 Ministry of Defence police serving with other forcesAfter section 2A of the Ministry of Defence Police Act 1987 (c. 4) (provision of assistance to other forces) there shall be inserted—“2B Constables serving with other forces(1) This section applies where a member of the Ministry of Defence Police serves with a relevant force under arrangements made between the chief officer of that force and the chief constable of the Ministry of Defence Police.(2) The member of the Ministry of Defence Police—(a) shall be under the direction and control of the chief officer of the relevant force; and(b) shall have the same powers and privileges as a member of that force.(3) In this section—  “British Transport Police Force” has the same meaning as in section 2 above;“chief officer” means—(a) any chief officer of police of a police force for a police area in Great Britain;(b) the chief constable of the Police Service of Northern Ireland;(c) the Director General of the National Criminal Intelligence Service;(d) the Director General of the National Crime Squad;(a) 
128	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)Part 5 – The Ministry of Defence PoliceChapter 2 – Provisions modifying and supplementing police powersDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(e) the chief constable of the British Transport Police Force; or(f) the chief constable of the United Kingdom Atomic Energy Authority Constabulary;“relevant force” means—(a) any police force for a police area in Great Britain;(b) the Police Service of Northern Ireland;(c) the National Criminal Intelligence Service;(d) the National Crime Squad;(e) the British Transport Police Force; or(f) the United Kingdom Atomic Energy Authority Constabulary; “United Kingdom Atomic Energy Authority Constabulary” has thesame meaning as in section 2 above.”79 Disciplinary matters(1) After section 3 of the Ministry of Defence Police Act 1987 (c. 4) there shall be inserted—“3A Regulations relating to disciplinary matters(1) The Secretary of State shall by regulations made by statutory instrument establish, or make provision for the establishment of, procedures for cases in which a member of the Ministry of Defence Police may be dealt with by suspension, dismissal, requirement to resign, reduction in rank, reduction in rate of pay, fine, reprimand or caution.(2) The regulations may provide—(a) for decisions which would otherwise fall to be taken by the Secretary of State or the chief constable of the Ministry of Defence Police to be taken instead—(i) by a person or persons appointed in accordance with the regulations; or(ii) by the Ministry of Defence Police Committee;and(b) for decisions taken by or on behalf of the Secretary of State or the chief constable of the Ministry of Defence Police to be reviewed by a person or persons appointed by or in accordance with the regulations.(3) In relation to any matter as to which provision may be made by regulations under this section, the regulations may—(a) authorise or require provision to be made by, or confer discretionary powers on, the Secretary of State, the Ministry of Defence Police Committee, the chief constable of the Ministry of Defence Police or other persons; or(b) authorise or require the delegation by any person of functions conferred on that person by or under the regulations.(4) Any statutory instrument containing regulations under this section shall be subject to annulment in pursuance of a resolution of either House of Parliament.”(1) 
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)Part 5 – The Ministry of Defence PoliceChapter 2 – Provisions modifying and supplementing police powers Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(2) After section 4 of that Act there shall be inserted—
129
“4A Appeals against dismissal etc.(1) Subject to subsection (2) below, a member of the Ministry of Defence Police who is dismissed, required to resign or reduced in rank by a decision taken—(a) in proceedings under regulations made in accordance with section 3A above, or(b) in proceedings for the purposes of any procedures established in accordance with an agreement or order under section 60 of the Police (Northern Ireland) Act 1998 (c. 32),may appeal to an appeals tribunal.(2) Subsection (1) above does not apply in the case of a person who has a right to apply to some other person for a review of the decision; and in that case that person may appeal to an appeals tribunal from any decision of that other person as a result of which he is dismissed, required to resign or reduced in rank.(3) The Secretary of State may by regulations made by statutory instrument—(a) make provision equivalent, subject to such modifications as the Secretary of State thinks fit, to that made in relation to police appeals tribunals by any provision of Schedule 6 to the Police Act 1996 (c. 16) or Schedule 3 to the Police (Scotland) Act 1967 (c. 77);(b) make provision as to procedure on appeals to appeals tribunals under this section; and(c) make provision enabling an appeals tribunal to require any person to attend a hearing and to give evidence or produce documents.(4) Regulations made by virtue of subsection (3)(c) above may, in particular, apply subsections (2) and (3) of section 250 of the Local Government Act 1972 (c. 70) or subsections (4) and (5) of section 210 of the Local Government (Scotland) Act 1973 (c. 65) with such modifications as may be set out in the regulations.(5) Where an appeals tribunal allows an appeal it may, if it considers that it is appropriate to do so, make an order dealing with the appellant in a way which—(a) appears to the tribunal to be less severe than the way in which he was dealt with by the decision appealed against; and(b) is a way in which he could have been dealt with by the person who made the decision.(6) Any statutory instrument containing regulations under subsection (3) above shall be subject to annulment in pursuance of a resolution of either House of Parliament.(7) In this section “an appeals tribunal” means a tribunal constituted in accordance with regulations under subsection (3) above.”(3) In section 1 of that Act (establishment of Ministry of Defence Police), for subsection (5) there shall be substituted—(1) 
130	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)Part 5 – The Ministry of Defence PoliceChapter 2 – Provisions modifying and supplementing police powersDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes“(5) The Secretary of State shall appoint a committee, to be known as the Ministry of Defence Police Committee—(a) to advise him with respect to such matters concerning the Ministry of Defence Police as he may from time to time require; and(b) to exercise such other functions as may be conferred on it by or under this Act;and the Secretary of State may make regulations concerning the membership and the procedure of the Committee.”(4) After section 6 of that Act there shall be inserted—“6A Powers to make regulationsAny power of the Secretary of State under this Act to make regulations shall include power to make different provision for different purposes.”80 Functions of inspectors of constabularyBefore section 5 of the Ministry of Defence Police Act 1987 (c. 4) there shall be inserted—“4B	Functions of inspectors of constabulary(1) The inspectors of constabulary shall inspect, and report to the Secretary of State on, the efficiency and effectiveness of the Ministry of Defence Police.(2) The Secretary of State may at any time require the inspectors of constabulary to carry out an inspection under this section of the Ministry of Defence Police and to report to him on that inspection.(3) A requirement under subsection (2) may include a requirement for the inspection to be confined to a particular part of the Ministry of Defence Police, to particular matters or to particular activities of the Ministry of Defence Police.(4) The inspectors of constabulary shall carry out such other duties for the purposes of furthering the efficiency and effectiveness of the Ministry of Defence Police as the Secretary of State may from time to time direct.(5) Before carrying out any inspection by virtue of subsection (1) in Scotland, the inspectors of constabulary shall consult the Scottish inspectors with respect to the scope and conduct of the proposed inspection.(6) In this section—  “the inspectors of constabulary” means Her Majesty’s Inspectors of Constabulary appointed under section 54 of the Police Act 1996 (c. 16);  “the Scottish inspectors” means the inspectors of constabulary appointed under section 33 of the Police (Scotland) Act 1967 (c. 77).  
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)Part 5 – The Ministry of Defence PoliceChapter 2 – Provisions modifying and supplementing police powers Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
131
4C	Publication of reports(1) Subject to subsection (2) below, the Secretary of State shall arrange for any report received by him under section 4B above to be published in such manner as appears to him to be appropriate.(2) The Secretary of State may exclude from publication under subsection (1) above any part of a report if, in his opinion, the publication of that part—(a) would be against the interests of national security; or(b) might jeopardise the safety of any person.(3) The Secretary of State shall—(a) send a copy of the published report to the chief constable of the Ministry of Defence Police; and(b) invite the chief constable to submit comments on the published report to the Secretary of State before such date as the Secretary of State may specify.(4) The Secretary of State shall arrange for—(a) any comments submitted by the chief constable in accordance with subsection (3) above, and(b) any response that the Secretary of State may prepare to the published report or to any comments submitted by the chief constable,to be published in such manner as he considers appropriate.”81 Exemptions from firearms legislation(1) After section 16A of the Firearms (Amendment) Act 1988 (c. 45) there shall be inserted—“16B Possession of firearms on Ministry of Defence Police premises(1) A person who is being trained or assessed in the use of firearms under the supervision of a member of the Ministry of Defence Police may, without holding a certificate or obtaining the authority of the Secretary of State under section 5 of the principal Act, have in his possession a firearm and ammunition on relevant premises for the purposes of the training or assessment.(2) In this section “relevant premises” means premises used for any purpose of the Ministry of Defence Police.”(2) [F506After Article 12A of the Firearms (Northern Ireland) Order 1981 (S.I. 1981/155 (N.I. 2)) there is inserted—12B	“ Possession of firearms on Ministry of Defence Police premises(1) A person who is being trained or assessed in the use of firearms under the supervision of a member of the Ministry of Defence Police may, without holding a firearm certificate or obtaining the authority of the Secretary of State under Article 6, have in his possession a firearm and ammunition on relevant premises for the purposes of the training or assessment.(1) 
132	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)Part 6 – MiscellaneousChapter 2 – Provisions modifying and supplementing police powersDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(2) In this Article “relevant premises” means premises used for any purpose of the Ministry of Defence Police.”]PART 6MISCELLANEOUSAppointment and attestation of police officers etc.82 Nationality requirements applicable to police officers etc.(1) Irrespective of his place of birth, a person of any nationality may be—(a) a member of a police force maintained for any police area in England and Wales F507...;[F508(aa)	a constable of the Police Service of Scotland;](b) a member of the Police Service of Northern Ireland or of the Police Service of Northern Ireland Reserve;(c) F509. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .(d) a member of the British Transport Police Force;[F510(e)	a member of the Civil Nuclear Constabulary; [F511or]](f) F512. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .(g) a special constable;and, accordingly, irrespective of his place of birth such a person may be attested or appointed, and hold office, as a constable.(2) Subsection (1) is subject to any provision falling within subsection which relates to qualification for appointment as a constable or as a special constable or for membership of, or for particular ranks, offices or positions with—(a) any force or constabulary; F513...[F514(aa)  the Police Service of Scotland; or](b) the Police Service of Northern Ireland or the Police Service of Northern Ireland Reserve; F515. . .(c) F515. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .(3) Provision falls within this subsection if it is—(a) provision made by regulations made under section 50 or 51 of the 1996 Act (regulations for police constables and for special constables);(b) provision made by regulations made under [F516section 48 of the Police and Fire Reform (Scotland) Act 2012 (governance and administration of police)];(c) provision made under section 25 or 26 of the Police (Northern Ireland) Act 1998 (c. 32) (regulations for police constables and for the constables in the Police Service of Northern Ireland Reserve); [F517and](a) 
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30) Part 6 – MiscellaneousChapter 2 – Provisions modifying and supplementing police powers Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
133
(d) F518. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .(e) provision given effect to by any arrangements made for the purpose of regulating appointment to membership of the British Transport Police Force, [F519or the Civil Nuclear Constabulary], or to particular ranks or positions with that Force or Constabulary.(4) Without prejudice to the generality of any power conferred apart from this section, the provision falling within subsection (3) that may be made by any such regulations, terms and conditions or arrangements as are mentioned in that subsection may include provision imposing any of the following requirements—(a) requirements with respect to the competence in written and spoken English of candidates for appointment;(b) requirements with respect to the immigration status of such candidates;(c) requirements with respect to nationality in the case of particular ranks, offices or positions;and, in a case where the power to make provision with respect to qualification for appointment as a constable or as a special constable, or for membership of a force [F520or Service] , is exercisable by any such regulations as are mentioned in that subsection, the regulations made must impose requirements with respect to all the matters mentioned in paragraphs (a) and (b).(5) F521. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
134	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)Chapter 2 – Provisions modifying and supplementing police powersDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes83 Attestation of constablesFor Schedule 4 to the 1996 Act there shall be substituted—       “SCHEDULE 4 FORM OF DECLARATION’I....................of	do solemnly and sincerely declare and affirm that I willwell and truly serve the Queen in the office of constable, with fairness, integrity, diligence and impartiality, upholding fundamental human rights and according equal respect to all people; and that I will, to the best of my power, cause the peace to be kept and preserved and prevent all offences against people and property; and that while I continue to hold the said office I will, to the best of my skill and knowledge, discharge all the duties thereof faithfully according to law.’”84 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .F522. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .85 Director General of NCISF523. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)Chapter 2 – Provisions modifying and supplementing police powers Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
135
86 Police members of NCISF524. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .87 Police members of NCSF525. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .88 Regulations for NCISF526. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .89 Regulations for NCSF527. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
136	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)Chapter 2 – Provisions modifying and supplementing police powersDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes90 Supplementary provisions about police membership of NCISF528. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .91 Supplementary provisions about police membership of NCSF529. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Bodies with functions in relation to the police92 Police authorities to produce three-year strategy plans(1) After section 6 of the 1996 Act there shall be inserted—“6A Three-year strategy plans(1) Every police authority maintaining a police force for a police area in England and Wales shall, before the beginning of every relevant three-year period, issue a plan (“a three-year strategy plan”) which sets out the authority’s medium and long term strategies for the policing of that area during that period.(2) Before a three-year strategy plan for any period is issued by a police authority, a draft of a plan setting out medium and long term strategies for the policing of the authority’s area during that period must have been—(a) prepared by the chief officer of police of the police force maintained by that authority; and(b) submitted by him to the police authority for its consideration.(3) In preparing the draft plan, the chief officer of police of a police force shall have regard to the views, obtained in accordance with arrangements under section 96, of people in the police area in question.(4) A police authority which has issued a three-year strategy plan for any period may modify that plan at any time during that period.(5) It shall be the duty, in issuing, preparing or modifying a three-year strategy plan or a draft of such a plan, of every police authority or chief officer of police to have regard to the National Policing Plan in force at that time.(1) 
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)Chapter 2 – Provisions modifying and supplementing police powers Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
137
(6) The Secretary of State —(a) shall issue guidance to police authorities and chief officers of police as to the matters to be contained in any three-year strategy plan, and as to the form to be taken by any such plan; and(b) may from time to time revise and modify that guidance;and it shall be the duty of every police authority and chief officer of police to take account of any guidance under this subsection when issuing, preparing or modifying any such plan or any draft plan prepared for the purposes of subsection (2).(7) Before issuing or revising any guidance under subsection (6) the Secretary of State shall consult with—(a) persons whom he considers to represent the interests of police authorities;(b) persons whom he considers to represent the interests of chief officers of police; and(c) such other persons as he thinks fit.(8) A police authority which is proposing to issue or modify any plan under this section shall submit that plan, or the modifications, to the Secretary of State.(9) Where a police authority issues a three-year strategy plan or modifies such a plan, it shall—(a) send a copy of the plan or the modified plan to the Secretary of State; and(b) cause the plan or modified plan to be published;and the copy of any modified plan sent to the Secretary of State and the publication of any modified plan must show the modifications, or be accompanied by or published with a document which sets them out or describes them.(10) If the Secretary of State considers that there are grounds for thinking that—(a) a police authority’s three-year strategy plan, or(b) any proposals by a police authority for such a plan, or for the modification of such a plan,may not be consistent with any National Policing Plan applicable to a financial year wholly or partly comprised in the period to which the strategy plan applies, he shall, before informing the police authority of his conclusions on whether or not it is in fact so inconsistent, consult with the persons mentioned in subsection (11).(11) Those persons are—(a) the police authority in question;(b) the chief officer of police of the police force maintained by that authority;(c) persons whom the Secretary of State considers to represent the interests of police authorities; and(d) persons whom the Secretary of State considers to represent the interests of chief officers of police.(12) Before a police authority—(1) 
138	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)Chapter 2 – Provisions modifying and supplementing police powersDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(a) issues a three-year strategy plan that differs in any material respect from the draft submitted to it by the chief officer of police of the force maintained by that authority, or  (b) modifies its three-year strategy plan, it shall consult with that chief officer.(13) Any best value performance plan prepared by a police authority under section 6 of the Local Government Act 1999 (c. 27) for any financial year must be consistent with any three-year strategy plan which sets out the authority’s current strategies for policing its area during any period which includes the whole or any part of that financial year.(14) The Secretary of State may by regulations make provision for—(a) the procedure to be followed on the submission to him of any plan or modifications for the purposes of this section; and(b) the periods which are to constitute relevant three-year periods for the purposes of this section;and those regulations may provide for a period of less than three years to be the first period treated as a relevant three-year period for the purposes of this section.(15) A statutory instrument containing regulations under this section shall be subject to annulment in pursuance of a resolution of either House of Parliament.”(2) In section 8 of that Act (local policing plans), after subsection (2) there shall be inserted—“(2A) The local policing plan for any financial year must be consistent with any three-year strategy plan under section 6A which sets out the authority’s current strategies for the policing of its area during any period which includes the whole or any part of that financial year.”(3) In section 9(2) of that Act (annual report by police authorities to include assessment of extent to which local policing plan carried out), for the words from “the local policing plan” onwards there shall be substituted “, during that year proposals have been implemented, and things have been done, in accordance with the following plans—(a) the three-year strategy plan issued under section 6A for the period that includes that year; and(b) the local policing plan issued for that year under section 8.”93 Quorum for the Service Authorities under the 1997 ActF530. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)Chapter 2 – Provisions modifying and supplementing police powers Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
139
94 Expenses of members of police authorities etc.F531. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .95 Duties under the Health and Safety at Work etc. Act 1974F532. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .F53396	President of ACPO. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .97 Crime and disorder reduction partnerships(1) The Crime and Disorder Act 1998 (c. 37) shall be amended as follows.(2) In section 5 (authorities responsible for strategies), in subsection (1), after paragraph (b) there shall be inserted—“(c)	every police authority any part of whose police area so lies;(d) every fire authority any part of whose area so lies;(e) if the local government area is in England, every Primary Care Trust the whole or any part of whose area so lies; and(f) if the local government area is in Wales, every health authority the whole or any part of whose area so lies.”(3) After subsection (1) of that section there shall be inserted—(1) 
140	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)Chapter 2 – Provisions modifying and supplementing police powersDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes“(1A) The Secretary of State may by order provide in relation to any two or more local government areas in England—(a) that the functions conferred by sections 6 to 7 below are to be carried out in relation to those areas taken together as if they constituted only one area; and(b) that the persons who for the purposes of this Chapter are to be taken to be responsible authorities in relation to the combined area are the persons who comprise every person who (apart from the order) would be a responsible authority in relation to any one or more of the areas included in the combined area.(1B) The Secretary of State shall not make an order under subsection (1A) above unless—(a) an application for the order has been made jointly by all the persons who would be the responsible authorities in relation to the combined area or the Secretary of State has first consulted those persons; and(b) he considers it would be in the interests of reducing crime and disorder, or of combatting the misuse of drugs, to make the order.”(4) In subsection (2) of that section (consultation)—(a) for paragraphs (a) and (b) there shall be substituted—“(b)  every local probation board any part of whose area lies within the area;”(b) at the end of paragraph (c) there shall be inserted “; and(d) where they are acting in relation to an area in Wales, every person or body which is of a description which is for the time being prescribed by an order under this subsection of the National Assembly for Wales;”.(5) In subsection (3) of that section, at the end there shall be inserted “and, in the case of the responsible authorities for an area in Wales, of any person or body of a description for the time being prescribed by an order under this subsection of the National Assembly for Wales.”(6) After subsection (4) of that section, there shall be inserted— “(5) In this section—“fire authority” means—(a) any fire authority constituted by a combination scheme under the Fire Services Act 1947 (c. 41);(b) any metropolitan county fire and civil defence authority; or(c) the London Fire and Emergency Planning Authority; and “police authority” means—(a) any police authority established under section 3 of the Police Act 1996 (c. 16); or(b) the Metropolitan Police Authority.”(7) F534. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .(8) F534. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .(9) F534. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .(1) 
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)Chapter 2 – Provisions modifying and supplementing police powers Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
141
(10) F534. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .(11) F534. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .(12) F534. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .(13) In section 114—(a) in subsection (1) (powers of Ministers exercisable by statutory instrument), after “Minister of the Crown” there shall be inserted “ or of the National Assembly for Wales ”; and(b) in subsection (2) (orders subject to negative resolution procedure), for “5(2) or (3) or 10(6) above, or” there shall be substituted “ 5(1A), (2) or (3), 6A(1) or 10(6) above (other than one made by the National Assembly for Wales), or containing ”.(14) In section 115(2) (authorities to which information may be disclosed for purposes connected with that Act), in paragraph (d)—(a) in sub-paragraph (i), after “London borough council” there shall be inserted “ , a parish council ”; and(b) in sub-paragraph (ii), for “or a county borough council” there shall be substituted “ , a county borough council or a community council ”.(15) Section 5(1) (as amended by subsection (2) shall have effect in relation to a local government area in England at any time when that area or a part of it comprises or contains an area that is not included in the area of a Primary Care Trust, as if the reference to a Primary Care Trust the whole or part of whose area lies within the local government area included a reference to any health authority or strategic health authority whose area comprises or includes the area for which there is no Primary Care Trust.98 Secretary of State’s functions in relation to strategiesF535. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
142	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)Chapter 2 – Provisions modifying and supplementing police powersDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes99 Power to modify functions and structure of PITOF536. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .100 Metropolitan Police Authority housing(1) In section 4(e) of the Housing Act 1985 (c. 68) (which defines local authorities for the purposes of the provisions of that Act, including those relating to secure tenancies), the words “the Metropolitan Police Authority” shall be omitted.(2) In paragraph 12(2)(g) of Schedule 1 to the Housing Act 1988 (c. 50) (local authority tenancies that cannot be assured tenancies), the words “and the Metropolitan Police Authority” shall be omitted.(3) Nothing in subsection (1) or in any repeal made by this Act for the purposes of that subsection shall affect—(a) the operation of Part 5 of the Housing Act 1985 (c. 68) (the right to buy) in relation to any case in which a person who had acquired a right to buy under that Part before the day on which this Act is passed either—(i) had served a notice under section 122 of that Act (tenant’s notice claiming right to buy) on the Metropolitan Police Authority before that day; or(ii) serves such a notice on that Authority in the period of three months beginning with that day;or(b) the extent to which, in any other case, any period falling before the day on which this Act is passed falls at any subsequent time to be treated as a period qualifying under any of the provisions of Schedule 4 to that Act.(4) A tenancy which becomes an assured tenancy by virtue of this section shall be an assured shorthold tenancy unless (whenever it was entered into) it—(a) falls within any of paragraphs 1 to 3 of Schedule 2A to the Housing Act 1988 (c. 50); or(b) was an assured tenancy, but not an assured shorthold tenancy, immediately before it became a secure tenancy.101 Provision of goods and services by police authoritiesFor section 18 of the 1996 Act (supply of goods and services) there shall be substituted—“18 Supply of goods and services(1) Subsections (1) to (3) of section 1 of the Local Authorities (Goods and Services) Act 1970 (c. 39) (supply of goods and services by local authorities)—(1) 
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)Chapter 2 – Provisions modifying and supplementing police powers Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
143
(a) shall apply, with the modification set out in subsection (2), to a police authority established under section 3 of this Act and to the Metropolitan Police Authority as they apply to a local authority; and(b) shall also apply with that modification in their application to the Common Council of the City of London in its capacity as the police authority for the City of London police force.(2) The modification is that references in those subsections to a public body shall be read as references to any person.”Liability for unlawful acts of constables etc.102 Liability for wrongful acts of constables etc.(1) Each of the enactments specified in subsection (2) shall be amended as follows—(a) for the words “torts committed by”, in each place where they occur, there shall be substituted “ any unlawful conduct of ”; and(b) for “in respect of any such tort” there shall be substituted “ , in the case of a tort, ”.(2) The enactments are—(a) section 88(1) of the 1996 Act (liability of chief officers);(b) section 97(9) of that Act (liability of the Secretary of State);(c) F537. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .(d) F537. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .(e) section 27(8) of the Police (Northern Ireland) Act 1998 (c. 32) (liability of the Secretary of State);(f) section 29(1) of that Act (liability of the chief constable of the Police Service of Northern Ireland);(g) paragraph 7(3) of Schedule 3 to that Act (liability of the Police Ombudsman); and(h) F538. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .(3) F538. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .(4) In each of the enactments specified in subsection (5), for “a tort committed by” there shall be substituted “ any unlawful conduct of ”.(5) The enactments are—(a) section 88(4)(a) of the 1996 Act (payments in respect of tort proceedings against constables and special constables);(b) F539. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .(c) F539. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .(d) section 29(3)(a) of the Police (Northern Ireland) Act 1998 (payments in respect of tort proceedings against police officers in Northern Ireland); and(e) paragraph 7(4)(a) of Schedule 3 to that Act (payment in respect of tort proceedings against police officers serving with, or assisting, the Police Ombudsman).(6) In section 42(6) of the 1997 Act (application to Scotland), paragraph (a) shall be omitted.(1) 
144	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)Chapter 2 – Provisions modifying and supplementing police powersDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(7) In section 39 (1) of the Police (Scotland) Act 1967 (c. 77) (liability for wrongful acts of constables)—(a) for “in reparation in respect of any wrongful act or omission” there shall be substituted “ for any unlawful conduct ”; and(b) for “in respect of a wrongful act or omission” there shall be substituted “ for any unlawful conduct ”.(8) In section 39(4) of that Act, for “wrongful act or omission” there shall be substituted “ unlawful conduct ”.International joint investigation teams103 Liability in respect of members of teams(1) In section 88 of the 1996 Act (liability for wrongful acts of constables), after subsection (5) there shall be inserted—“(6) This section shall have effect where an international joint investigation team has been formed under the leadership of a constable who is a member of a police force as if—(a) any unlawful conduct, in the performance or purported performance of his functions as such, of any member of that team who is neither a constable nor an employee of the police authority were unlawful conduct of a constable under the direction and control of the chief officer of police of that force; and(b) subsection (4) applied, in the case of the police authority maintaining that force, to every member of that team to whom it would not apply apart from this subsection.(7) In this section “international joint investigation team” means any investigation team formed in accordance with—(a) any framework decision on joint investigation teams adopted under Article 34 of the Treaty on European Union;(b) the Convention on Mutual Assistance in Criminal Matters between the Member States of the European Union, and the Protocol to that(a) 
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)Chapter 2 – Provisions modifying and supplementing police powers Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
145
Convention, established in accordance with that Article of that Treaty; or(c) any international agreement to which the United Kingdom is a party and which is specified for the purposes of this section in an order made by the Secretary of State.(8) A statutory instrument containing an order under subsection (7) shall be subject to annulment in pursuance of a resolution of either House of Parliament.”(2) F540. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .(3) F540. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .F541(4) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .(5) In section 29 of the Police (Northern Ireland) Act 1998 (c. 32) (liability for wrongful acts of constables), after subsection (5) there shall be inserted—“(6) This section shall have effect where an international joint investigation team has been formed under the leadership of a constable who is a member of the Police Service of Northern Ireland as if any unlawful conduct, in the performance or purported performance of his functions as such, of any member of that team who is neither—(a) a constable, nor(b) an employee of the Board,were unlawful conduct of a constable under the direction and control of the Chief Constable.(7) In this section “international joint investigation team” means any investigation team formed in accordance with—(a) any framework decision on joint investigation teams adopted under Article 34 of the Treaty on European Union;(b) the Convention on Mutual Assistance in Criminal Matters between the Member States of the European Union, and the Protocol to that Convention, established in accordance with that Article of that Treaty; or(c) any international agreement to which the United Kingdom is a party and which is specified for the purposes of this section in an order made by the Secretary of State.(8) A statutory instrument containing an order under subsection (7) shall be subject to annulment in pursuance of a resolution of either House of Parliament.”(6) Where—(a) any sums are paid by virtue of this section out of a police fund F542. . . or by the Chief Constable of the Police Service of Northern Ireland, and(b) in pursuance of any international obligation, the Secretary of State receives any sum by way of reimbursement, in whole or in part, of the sums paid out of that fund or by that Chief Constable,the Secretary of State shall pay into that fund or (as the case may be) to that Chief Constable the sums received by him by way of reimbursement.
146	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)Chapter 2 – Provisions modifying and supplementing police powersDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesF543(7) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .104 Assaults on members of teams(1) In section 89 of the 1996 Act (assaults on constables), after subsection (3) there shall be inserted—“(4) In this section references to a person assisting a constable in the execution of his duty include references to any person who is neither a constable nor in the company of a constable but who—(a) is a member of an international joint investigation team that is led by a member of a police force or by a member of the National Criminal Intelligence Service or of the National Crime Squad; and(b) is carrying out his functions as a member of that team.(5) In this section “international joint investigation team” means any investigation team formed in accordance with—(a) any framework decision on joint investigation teams adopted under Article 34 of the Treaty on European Union;(b) the Convention on Mutual Assistance in Criminal Matters between the Member States of the European Union, and the Protocol to that Convention, established in accordance with that Article of that Treaty; or(c) any international agreement to which the United Kingdom is a party and which is specified for the purposes of this section in an order made by the Secretary of State.(6) A statutory instrument containing an order under subsection (5) shall be subject to annulment in pursuance of a resolution of either House of Parliament.”(2) In section 41 of the Police (Scotland) Act 1967 (c. 77) (assaults on constables), after subsection (3) there shall be inserted—(1) 
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)Chapter 2 – Provisions modifying and supplementing police powers Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
147
“(4) In this section references to a person assisting a constable in the execution of his duty include references to any person who is neither a constable nor in the company of a constable but who—(a) is a member of an international joint investigation team that is led by a constable of a police force or by a member of the National Criminal Intelligence Service or of the National Crime Squad; and(b) is carrying out his functions as a member of that team.(5) In this section “international joint investigation team” means any investigation team formed in accordance with—(a) any framework decision on joint investigation teams adopted under Article 34 of the Treaty on European Union;(b) the Convention on Mutual Assistance in Criminal Matters between the Member States of the European Union, and the Protocol to that Convention, established in accordance with that Article of that Treaty; or(c) any international agreement to which the United Kingdom is a party and which is specified for the purposes of this section in an order made by the Secretary of State with the consent of the Scottish Ministers.(6) A statutory instrument containing an order under subsection (5) shall be subject to annulment in pursuance of a resolution of either House of Parliament.”(3) In section 66 of the Police (Northern Ireland) Act 1998 (c. 32) (assaults on constables), after subsection (4) there shall be inserted—“(5) In this section references to a person assisting a constable in the execution of his duty include references to any person who is neither a constable nor in the company of a constable but who—(a) is a member of an international joint investigation team that is led by a member of the Police Service of Northern Ireland; and(b) is carrying out his functions as a member of that team.(6) In this section “international joint investigation team” means any investigation team formed in accordance with—(a) any framework decision on joint investigation teams adopted under Article 34 of the Treaty on European Union;(b) the Convention on Mutual Assistance in Criminal Matters between the Member States of the European Union, and the Protocol to that Convention, established in accordance with that Article of that Treaty; or(c) any international agreement to which the United Kingdom is a party and which is specified for the purposes of this section in an order made by the Secretary of State.(7) A statutory instrument containing an order under subsection (6) shall be subject to annulment in pursuance of a resolution of either House of Parliament.”(6) 
148	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)Part 7 – SupplementalChapter 2 – Provisions modifying and supplementing police powersDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesPART 7SUPPLEMENTAL105 Powers of Secretary of State to make orders and regulations(1) Every power conferred by this Act on the Secretary of State to make orders or regulations shall be exercisable by statutory instrument.(2) A statutory instrument containing an order or regulations made in exercise of any such power, other than an order to which subsection (3) applies, shall be subject to annulment in pursuance of a resolution of either House of Parliament.(3) This subsection applies to—(a) any order under section 9(7) or 108; and(b) [F544any order or regulations that are] required to be approved in draft by virtue of section 19(3), [F54538(9C),]F546... [F547or 41B]F548... F549... [F550or paragraph9A(2) of Schedule 5].(4) Every power of the Secretary of State to make an order or regulations under this Act, other than an order under section 9(7) or 108, shall include power—(a) to make different provision for different cases;(b) to make provision subject to such exemptions and exceptions as the Secretary of State thinks fit; and(c) to make such incidental, supplemental, consequential and transitional provision as the Secretary of State thinks fit.(5) Every power of the Secretary of State to make provision by regulations under Part 2 [F551or 2B] shall include power to make provision for any of the matters that may be provided for to be determined, in accordance with the regulations, by the [F552Director General of the Independent Office for Police Conduct].
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30) Part 7 – SupplementalChapter 2 – Provisions modifying and supplementing police powers Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
149
106 General interpretationIn this Act—“the 1984 Act” means the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 (c. 60); “the 1996 Act” means the Police Act 1996 (c. 16);“the 1997 Act” means the Police Act 1997 (c. 50);F553...  [F554“the British Transport Police Force” means the force of constables appointed under section 53 of the British Transport Commission Act 1949 (c. xxix);]  “modifications” includes omissions, alterations and additions, and cognate expressions shall be construed accordingly.107 Consequential amendments and repeals(1) Schedule 7 (which makes minor and consequential amendments) shall have effect.(2) The enactments specified in Schedule 8 (which include provisions that are spent or have ceased to be of any practical utility) are hereby repealed to the extent specified in the second column of that Schedule.
150	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)Part 7 – SupplementalChapter 2 – Provisions modifying and supplementing police powersDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes108 Short title, commencement and extent(1) This Act may be cited as the Police Reform Act 2002.(2) This Act, except—(a) the provisions specified in subsection (3) (which come into force on the day on which this Act is passed), and(b) the provisions to which subsections (4) and (5) apply,shall come into force on such day as the Secretary of State may by order appoint; and different days may be appointed under this subsection for different purposes or different areas.(3) The provisions coming into force on the day on which this Act is passed are—(a) section 100, the entries in Schedule 8 relating to the Housing Act 1985 (c. 68), the Housing Act 1988 (c. 50), paragraphs 51 and 59 of Schedule 27 to theGreater London Authority Act 1999 (c. 29) and paragraph 74 of Schedule 6 to the Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16) and section 107(2) (so far as relating to those entries); and(b) sections 105 and 106 and this section.(4) The provisions of sections 97 and 98, so far as they relate to local government areas in Wales, shall come into force on such day as the National Assembly for Wales may by order made by statutory instrument appoint; and different days may be appointed under this subsection for different purposes or different areas.(5) Sections 70 and 71, and sections 102 to 104 so far as they amend the Police (Scotland) Act 1967 (c. 77), shall come into force on such day as the Scottish Ministers may by order appoint; and different days may be appointed under this subsection for different purposes or different areas.(6) Subject to subsections (7) to (9), this Act extends to England and Wales only.(7) This Act extends to the United Kingdom so far as it makes the following provision— [F555(za)	the provision contained in paragraph 19F of Schedule 3 (and any interpretative or other supplementary provision as it has effect for the purposes of thatprovision);](a) the provision contained in Part 5;(b) the provision contained in section 82;(c) F556. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .(d) the provision contained in section 103(6);(e) F557. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .(8) Section 96 also extends to Northern Ireland.(1) 
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30) Part 7 – SupplementalChapter 2 – Provisions modifying and supplementing police powers Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
151
(9) Subject to subsection (10), this Act, so far as it amends or repeals any enactment (other than one that extends to England and Wales only), has the same extent as the enactment amended or repealed.(10) The amendments and repeals made by this Act—(a) in section 96 of the Road Traffic Regulation Act 1984 (c. 27) (traffic wardens),(b) in sections 103 and 183 of the Road Traffic Act 1988 (c. 52) (driving while disqualified), and  (c) Part 3 of the Road Traffic Offenders Act 1988 (c. 53) (fixed penalties), do not extend to Scotland.Subordinate Legislation MadeP1	S. 108(2) power partly exercised: 1.10.2002 and 1.11.2002 appointed for specified provisions by {S.I.2002/2306}, arts. 2-5;S. 108(2) power partly exercised: 2.12.2002, 1.1.2003 and 3.2.2003 appointed for specified provisions by {S.I. 2002/2750}, arts. 2-5P2	S. 108(2) power partly exercised: 1.4.2003 appointed for specified provisions and purposes by {S.I.2003/808}, art. 2P3	S. 108(2) power partly exercised: 15.11.2003 appointed for specified provisions and purposes by {S.I.2003/2593}, art. 2P4	S. 108(2) power partly exercised: 23.2.2004 appointed for specified provision for E. by {S.I.2004/119}, art. 2P5	S. 108(2) power partly exercised: 9.3.2004 appointed for specified provision by {S.I. 2004/636}, art. 2P6	S. 108(2) power partly exercised: different dates appointed for specified provisions and purposes by{S.I. 2004/913}, arts. 2, 3P7	S. 108(2) power partly exercised: 1.6.2004 appointed for specified provisions by {S.I. 2004/1319}, art.2P8	S. 108(2) power partly exercised: 23.12.2004 appointed for specified provisions and purposes by {S.I.2004/3338}, arts. 2, 3P9	S. 108(4) power fully exercised: 1.4.2003 appointed for specified provisions and purposes by {S.I.2003/525}, art. 2P10  S. 108(5) power fully exercised: 1.10.2002 appointed by {S.S.I. 2002/420}, art .2Textual AmendmentsF555 S. 108(7)(za) inserted (19.12.2012) by Police (Complaints and Conduct) Act 2012 (c. 22), ss. 1(4), 3(3)F556 S. 108(7)(c) repealed (1.4.2007) by Police and Justice Act 2006 (c. 48), ss. 52, 53, Sch. 15 Pt. 1(A);S.I. 2007/709, art. 3(q) (subject to arts. 6, 7)F557 S. 108(7)(e) repealed (1.4.2006) by Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15), ss. 55, 174, 178, Sch. 2 para. 10, Sch. 17 Pt. 2; S.I. 2006/378, art. 4(1), Sch. paras. 8, 12, 13(oo) (subject to art.4(2)-(7))
152	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 1Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesSCHEDULES F558F558SCHEDULE 1. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .F559 SCHEDULE 2	Section 9[F559THE INDEPENDENT OFFICE FOR POLICE CONDUCT][F560Director General]1 [F561(1) The Director General holds office in accordance with the terms of his or her appointment.(1A) A person who holds office as Director General must not be an employee of the Office (but may have been such an employee before appointment as the Director General).](2) A person who has been sentenced to a term of imprisonment of three months or more shall not, at any time in the five years following the day on which he was sentenced, be appointed as [F562Director General]; and an appointment made in contravention of this sub-paragraph shall have no effect.(3) The appointment of the [F563Director General] shall be for a term not exceeding five years; but the [F564Director General] shall be eligible for re-appointment at the end of his term of office.(4) The [F565Director General] may be removed from office by Her Majesty either—(2) 
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 2 – The Independent Office for Police Conduct Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
153
(a) at his own request; or(b) on being advised by the Secretary of State that there are grounds falling with sub-paragraph (5) for the removal of the [F566Director General].(5) The following are grounds for removing the [F567Director General] from office—(a) that he has failed without reasonable excuse to carry out the functions of his office for a continuous period of three months;(b) that he has become a person falling within one or more paragraphs of section 9(3);(c) that he has, since his appointment, been sentenced to imprisonment for a term of three months or more;(d) that he is a person who—(i) has had a bankruptcy order made against him;(ii) has had his estate sequestrated; or(iii) has made a composition or arrangement with, or granted a trust deed for, his creditors;(e) that he is subject to—(i) a disqualification order under the Company Directors Disqualification Act 1986 (c. 46) or under [F568the Company Directors Disqualification (Northern Ireland) Order 2002] (S.I. 1989/2404 (N.I. 18)); or(ii) an order made under section 429(2)(b) of the Insolvency Act 1986 (c. 45) (failure to pay under county court administration order);(f) that he has acted improperly in relation to his duties; or(g) that he is otherwise unable or unfit to perform his duties.(6) For the purposes of this paragraph a sentence of imprisonment for any term the whole or part of which is suspended shall be taken to be a sentence of imprisonment for the whole term.
154	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 2 – The Independent Office for Police ConductDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesAppointment of members[F5691A(1) The non-executive members of the Office are to be appointed by the Secretary of State.(2) A person who is a non-executive member must not be an employee of the Office (but may have been such an employee before appointment as a non-executive member).1B	(1) The employee members of the Office are to be appointed from the staff of the Office by the non-executive members.(2) If the non-executive members propose to appoint an employee member, the Director General must recommend a person to the non-executive members for appointment.(3) The Director General may also recommend a person to the non-executive members for appointment as an employee member without any proposal having been made under sub-paragraph (2).(4) On a recommendation of a person for appointment under sub-paragraph (2) or (3), the non-executive members may—(a) appoint the person, or(b) reject the recommendation.(5) If the non-executive members reject a recommendation they may require the Director General to recommend another person for appointment (in which case this sub- paragraph applies again and so on until somebody is appointed).]
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 2 – The Independent Office for Police Conduct Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
155
[F570Terms of appointment etc: non-executive members]2 (1) Subject to the provisions of this Schedule, a person shall hold office as [F571a non- executive] member in accordance with the terms of his appointment.F572(2) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .(3) A person who has been sentenced to a term of imprisonment of three months or more shall not, at any time in the five years following the day on which he is sentenced, be appointed as [F573a non-executive] member; and an appointment made in contravention of this sub-paragraph shall have no effect.(4) A person shall not be appointed to be [F574a non-executive] member for a term of more than [F575three] years; but [F574a non-executive] member shall be eligible for re- appointment at the end of his term of office.(5) [F576A non-executive] member may at any time resign [F577from being a non-executive member of the Office] by notice in writing to the Secretary of State.(6) The Secretary of State may at any time remove a person from office as [F578a non- executive] member if he is satisfied that that person—(a) has failed without reasonable excuse to carry out the functions of his office for a continuous period of three months beginning not earlier than six months before that time;F579(b)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .(c) has, since his appointment, been sentenced to imprisonment for a term of three months or more;(d) is a person who—(i) has had a bankruptcy order made against him;(ii) has had his estate sequestrated; or(iii) has made a composition or arrangement with, or granted a trust deed for, his creditors;(e) is subject to—(i) a disqualification order under the Company Directors Disqualification Act 1986 (c. 46) or under [F580the Company Directors Disqualification (Northern Ireland) Order 2002](S.I. 1989/2404 (N.I. 18)); or(ii) an order made under section 429(2)(b) of the Insolvency Act 1986 (c. 45) (failure to pay under county court administration order);(f) has acted improperly in relation to his duties; or(g) is otherwise unable or unfit to perform his duties.(7) For the purposes of this paragraph a sentence of imprisonment for any term the whole or part of which is suspended shall be taken to be a sentence of imprisonment for the whole term.F581(8) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
156	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 2 – The Independent Office for Police ConductDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesTextual AmendmentsF570 Sch. 2 para. 2 cross-heading substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 55(4); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)F571 Words in Sch. 2 para. 2(1) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 3.4.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 4(2); S.I. 2017/399, reg. 2, Sch. para. 39(d); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)F572 Sch. 2 para. 2(2) omitted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 3.4.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by virtue of Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 4(3); S.I. 2017/399, reg. 2, Sch. para. 39(d); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)F573 Words in Sch. 2 para. 2(3) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 3.4.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 4(4); S.I. 2017/399, reg. 2, Sch. para. 39(d); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)F574 Words in Sch. 2 para. 2(4) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 3.4.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 4(5)(a); S.I. 2017/399, reg. 2, Sch. para. 39(d); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)F575 Word in Sch. 2 para. 2(4) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 3.4.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 4(5)(b); S.I. 2017/399, reg. 2, Sch. para. 39(d); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)F576 Words in Sch. 2 para. 2(5) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 3.4.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 4(6)(a); S.I. 2017/399, reg. 2, Sch. para. 39(d); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)F577 Words in Sch. 2 para. 2(5) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 3.4.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 4(6)(b); S.I. 2017/399, reg. 2, Sch. para. 39(d); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)F578 Words in Sch. 2 para. 2(6) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 3.4.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 4(7)(a); S.I. 2017/399, reg. 2, Sch. para. 39(d); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)F579 Sch. 2 para. 2(6)(b) omitted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 3.4.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by virtue of Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 4(7)(b); S.I. 2017/399, reg. 2, Sch. para. 39(d); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)F580 Words in Sch. 2 para. 2(6)(e)(i) substituted (1.10.2009) by The Companies Act 2006 (Consequential Amendments, Transitional Provisions and Savings) Order 2009 (S.I. 2009/1941), art. 2(1), Sch. 1 para. 197(b) (with art. 10)F581 Sch. 2 para. 2(8) omitted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 3.4.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by virtue of Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 4(8); S.I. 2017/399, reg. 2, Sch. para. 39(d); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)Terms of appointment etc: employee members[F5822A(1) A person holds office as an employee member in accordance with the terms of his or her appointment (subject to the provisions of this Schedule).(2) Those terms may not include arrangements in relation to remuneration.(3) An appointment as an employee member may be full-time or part-time.(4) The appointment of an employee member terminates—(a) if the terms of the member's appointment provides for it to expire at the end of a period, at the end of that period, and(b) in any event, when the member ceases to be an employee of the Office.(a) 
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 2 – The Independent Office for Police Conduct Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
157
(5) An employee member may resign by giving written notice to the non-executive members.(6) The non-executive members may terminate the appointment of an employee member by giving the member written notice if they are satisfied that any of the grounds mentioned in paragraph 2(6)(a) to (g) apply in relation to the employee member.]Deputy ChairmenF5833	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Director General: vacancy or incapacity[F5843A(1) This paragraph applies if—(a) the office of Director General is vacant, or(b) it appears to the Office that the ability of the Director General to carry out the Director General's functions is seriously impaired because of ill health (whether mental or physical).(2) The Office may, with the agreement of the Secretary of State, authorise an employee of the Office to carry out the functions of the Director General during the vacancy or period of ill health.(3) A person who falls within section 9(3) may not be authorised under this paragraph to carry out the functions of the Director General.(4) A person who has been sentenced to a term of imprisonment of three months or more may not, at any time in the five years following the day of sentence, be authorised under this paragraph to carry out the functions of the Director General.(5) Paragraph 1(6) applies for the purposes of sub-paragraph (4).(6) Authorisation of a person under this paragraph ceases to have effect—(a) at the end of the vacancy or period of ill health,(b) on the Office revoking the authorisation for any reason, or(c) on the Secretary of State withdrawing agreement to the authorisation for any reason.](a) 
158	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 2 – The Independent Office for Police ConductDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesRemuneration, pensions etc. of members4  (1) The Secretary of State may pay, or make such payments towards the provision of, such remuneration, pensions, allowances or gratuities to or in respect of [F585the Director General as the Secretary of State may determine].(2) Where—(a) a person ceases, otherwise than on the expiry of his term of office, to hold office as [F586Director General], and(b) it appears to the Secretary of State that there are special circumstances which make it right for that person to receive compensation,the Secretary of State may direct the [F587Office] to make a payment to that person of such amount as the Secretary of State may determine.[F588(3) The Secretary of State may make remuneration arrangements in relation to non- executive members of the Office.(4) Remuneration arrangements under sub-paragraph (3)—(a) may make provision for a salary, allowances and other benefits but not for a pension, and(b) may include a formula or other mechanism for adjusting one or more of those elements from time to time.(5) Amounts payable by virtue of sub-paragraph (4) are to be paid by the Office.]The Chief ExecutiveF5895	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 2 – The Independent Office for Police Conduct Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
159
Staff6 [F590(1) The Office may appoint staff.](2) The [F591Office] may make arrangements with—(a) the chief officer of police of any police force maintained for a police area in England and Wales,(b) the chief constable of [F592the Police Service of Scotland], or(c) the Chief Constable of the Police Service of Northern Ireland,under which members of his force are engaged on temporary service with the[F591Office].(3) The [F593Office] may make such other arrangements for its staffing [F594(including arrangements in relation to terms and conditions and management of staff)] as [F595the Director General] thinks fit.(4) A member of a police force on temporary service with the [F596Office] shall be under the direction and control of the [F597Director General].[F598(4A) The powers under this paragraph are exercisable only by the Director General acting on behalf of the Office (subject to the power under paragraph 6A(1)).](5) The approval of the Secretary of State as to numbers and as to the terms and conditions of staff shall be required for the exercise [F599of the] powers under this paragraph.
160	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 2 – The Independent Office for Police ConductDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesDelegation of functions[F6006A(1) The Director General may authorise a person within sub-paragraph (2) to exercise on the Director General's behalf a function of the Director General.(2) The persons within this sub-paragraph are—(a) employee members of the Office;(b) employees of the Office appointed under paragraph 6;(c) seconded constables within the meaning of paragraph 8.(3) The reference in sub-paragraph (1) to a function of the Director General is to any function that the Director General has under this Act or any other enactment.(4) A person (“A”) who is authorised under sub-paragraph (1) to exercise a function may authorise another person within sub-paragraph (2) to exercise that function (but only so far as permitted to do so by the authorisation given to A).(5) An authorisation under this paragraph may provide for a function to which it relates to be exercisable—(a) either to its full extent or to the extent specified in the authorisation;(b) either generally or in cases, circumstances or areas so specified;(c) either unconditionally or subject to conditions so specified.(6) Provision under sub-paragraph (5) may (in particular) include provision for restricted persons not to exercise designated functions.(7) For the purposes of sub-paragraph (6)—(a) “designated functions” are any functions of the Director General that are designated by the Director General for the purposes of this paragraph (and such functions may in particular be designated by reference to the position or seniority of members of staff);(b) “restricted persons” are, subject to any determination made under sub- paragraph (8), persons who fall within section 9(3).(a) 
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 2 – The Independent Office for Police Conduct Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
161
(8) The Director General may, in such circumstances as the Director General considers appropriate, determine that persons are not to be treated as restricted persons so far as relating to the exercise of designated functions (whether generally or in respect of particular functions specified in the determination).(9) The Director General must publish a statement of policy about how the Director General proposes to exercise the powers conferred by sub-paragraphs (7)(a) and (8).(10) The statement must in particular draw attention to any restrictions on the carrying out of functions imposed by virtue of their designation under sub-paragraph (7)(a) and explain the reasons for imposing them.(11) The exercise of the powers conferred by sub-paragraphs (7)(a) and (8) is subject to any regulations under section 23(1) of the kind mentioned in section 23(2)(g) (regulations limiting persons who may be appointed to carry out investigations etc).(12) An authorisation under this paragraph does not prevent the Director General from exercising the function to which the authorisation relates.(13) Anything done or omitted to be done by or in relation to a person authorised under this paragraph in, or in connection with, the exercise or purported exercise of the function to which the authorisation relates is to be treated for all purposes as done or omitted to be done by or in relation to the Director General.(14) Sub-paragraph (13) does not apply for the purposes of any criminal proceedings brought in respect of anything done or omitted to be done by the authorised person.]Superannuation and insurance7   (1) Where a person who—(a) is employed by the [F601Office], and(b) is by reference to that employment a participant in a scheme under section 1 of the Superannuation Act 1972 (c. 11),is appointed as the [F602Director General]F603..., the Treasury may determine that his service in that office shall be treated for the purposes of the scheme as service as an employee of the [F601Office]; and his rights under the scheme shall not be affected by anything done under paragraph 4.(2) The Employers’ Liability (Compulsory Insurance) Act 1969 (c. 57) shall not require insurance to be effected by the [F601Office].
162	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 2 – The Independent Office for Police ConductDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesLiability for acts of the Director General[F6047A(1) A person holding office as the Director General has no personal liability for an act or omission done by the person in the exercise of the Director General's functions unless it is shown to have been done otherwise than in good faith.(2) The Office is liable in respect of unlawful conduct of the Director General in the carrying out, or purported carrying out, of the Director General's functions in the same way as an employer is liable in respect of any unlawful conduct of employees in the course of their employment.(3) Accordingly, the Office is to be treated, in the case of any such unlawful conduct which is a tort, as a joint tortfeasor.]Liability for acts of seconded staff8   (1) The [F605Office] shall be liable in respect of unlawful conduct of seconded constables in the carrying out, or purported carrying out, of their functions as members of the [F606Office's] staff in the like manner as an employer is liable in respect of any unlawful conduct of his employees in the course of their employment.(2) Accordingly, the [F605Office] shall be treated in the case of any such unlawful conduct which is a tort, as a joint tortfeasor.(3) In this paragraph “seconded constables” means persons serving as members of the[F606Office's] staff without being employed by it.
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 2 – The Independent Office for Police Conduct Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
163
Power F607... to set up regional offices[F6089 (1) The Office may set up regional offices in places in England and Wales.(2) But the power under sub-paragraph (1) is exercisable only by the Director General acting on behalf of the Office (subject to the power in paragraph 6A(1)).(3) The power under sub-paragraph (1) may be exercised—(a) only with the consent of the Secretary of State, and(b) only if it appears to the Director General necessary to do so for the purpose of ensuring that the functions of the Director General, or those of the Office, are carried out efficiently and effectively.]Proceedings10 (1) The arrangements for the proceedings of the [F609Office] (including the quorum for meetings and the establishment of committees) shall be such as the [F609Office] may determine.[F610(1A) But the arrangements must include provision for—(a) the quorum for meetings to be met only if a majority of members present are non-executive members of the Office, and(b) an audit committee of the Office to be established to perform such monitoring, reviewing and other functions as are appropriate.(1B) The arrangements must secure that the audit committee consists only of non- executive members of the Office.](2) The arrangements may include provision for the committees established under the arrangements to include members of the [F611Office's] staff and other persons who are not members of the [F609Office].(3) The arrangements may include provision for persons selected by the [F609Office] to attend meetings of the [F609Office] or of any committee established by it.(4) The [F609Office] may—(a) pay such remuneration and allowances as it may determine to members of committees established by it who are neither members of the [F609Office] nor members of its staff; and(b) make such payments for the reimbursement of expenses incurred by persons attending meetings in accordance with arrangements made by virtue of sub- paragraph (3) as it may determine.(5) The arrangements may provide for the carrying out, under the general direction of the [F609Office], of any of the [F611Office's] functions—(2) 
164	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 2 – The Independent Office for Police ConductDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(a) by a committee established by the [F609Office];(b) by one or more of the members of the [F609Office]; or(c) F612... by one or more members of the [F611Office's] staff.F613(6) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .11 The validity of any proceedings of the [F614Office] or of any of its committees shall not be affected by—(a) any defect in the appointment of the [F615Director General] or any member of the [F614Office]; or(b) any vacancy in the office of [F616Director General] or among the members of the [F614Office].Authentication of the [F617Office's] seal12 The application of the seal of the [F618Office] shall be authenticated by the signature of—(a) any member of the [F619Office]; or(b) any other person who has been authorised by the [F620Director General] (whether generally or specially) for that purpose.(a) 
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 2 – The Independent Office for Police Conduct Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
165
Evidence of documents13 A document purporting to be—(a) duly executed by the [F621Office] under its seal, or(b) signed on its behalf,shall be received in evidence and shall, unless the contrary is shown, be taken to be so executed or signed.Payments by the Secretary of State14 The Secretary of State may pay to the [F622Office]—(a) sums equal to any amounts paid or falling to be paid by it under any provision of this Act (other than paragraph 15); and(b) such other sums as appear to him to be appropriate for enabling it to meet the expenses incurred or to be incurred [F623in the carrying out of its or the Director General's functions].
166	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 2 – The Independent Office for Police ConductDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesOther receipts by the [F624Office]15 (1) The [F625Office] shall pay to the Secretary of State all sums received by it (otherwise than under paragraph 14) in the course of, or in connection with, the carrying out of its [F626or the Director General's] functions.(2) Sub-paragraph (1) shall not apply where the Secretary of State so directs.(3) Any sums received by the Secretary of State under this paragraph shall be paid into the Consolidated Fund.Borrowing16 The [F627Office] shall not borrow money unless authorised to do so (whether generally or specially) by the Secretary of State.Accounts17 (1) The [F628Office] shall—(a) keep proper accounts and proper records in relation to the accounts;(b) prepare in respect of each financial year of the [F628Office] a statement of accounts in such form as the Secretary of State may direct; and(c) send copies of the statement to the Secretary of State and the Comptroller and Auditor General before the end of August in the financial year of the [F628Office] following that to which the statement relates.(2) The Comptroller and Auditor General shall—(a) examine, certify and report on every statement received by him by virtue of this paragraph; and(b) lay copies of every such statement, and of his report on it, before Parliament.(a) 
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc. Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
167
Financial year of the [F629Office]18 The following are financial years of the [F630Office]—(a) the period beginning with the day on which the [F630Office] is established and ending with 31st March falling next after that day; and(b) every subsequent period of twelve months ending with 31st March.SCHEDULE 3	Section 13HANDLING OF COMPLAINTS AND CONDUCT MATTERS ETC.PART 1HANDLING OF COMPLAINTSDuties to preserve evidence relating to complaints1 (1) Where a complaint is made about the conduct of a chief officer, it shall be the duty of the [F631local policing body] maintaining his force to secure that all such steps as are appropriate for the purposes of Part 2 of this Act are taken, both initially and fromtime to time after that, for obtaining and preserving evidence relating to the conduct complained of.
168	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc.Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(2) Where—(a) a complaint is made to a chief officer about the conduct of a person under his direction and control, or(b) a chief officer becomes aware that a complaint about the conduct of a person under his direction or control has been made to the [F632Director General] or to a [F633local policing body],the chief officer shall take all such steps as appear to him to be appropriate for the purposes of Part 2 of this Act for obtaining and preserving evidence relating to the conduct complained of.(3) The chief officer’s duty under sub-paragraph (2) must be performed as soon as practicable after the complaint is made or, as the case may be, he becomes aware of it.(4) After that, he shall be under a duty, until he is satisfied that it is no longer necessary to do so, to continue to take the steps from time to time appearing to him to be appropriate for the purposes of Part 2 of this Act for obtaining and preserving evidence relating to the conduct complained of.(5) It shall be the duty of a [F634local policing body] to comply with all such directions as may be given to it by the [F632Director General] in relation to the performance of its duty under sub-paragraph (1).(6) It shall be the duty of a chief officer to take all such specific steps for obtaining or preserving evidence relating to F635... the subject-matter of a complaint as he may be directed to take for the purposes of this paragraph by the [F636local policing body] maintaining his force or by the [F632Director General].
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc. Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
169
Initial handling and recording of complaints2 [F637(1) Where a complaint is made to the [F632Director General], [F638the Director General] shall give notification of the complaint to the appropriate authority.(1A) But the [F632Director General] need not give that notification if the [F632Director General] considers that there are exceptional circumstances that justify its not being given.](2) Where a complaint is made to a [F639local policing body], it shall—(a) determine whether or not it is itself the appropriate authority; and(b) if it determines that it is not, give notification of the complaint to the person who is.(3) Where a complaint is made to a chief officer, he shall—(a) determine whether or not he is himself the appropriate authority; and(b) if he determines that he is not, give notification of the complaint to the person who is.F640(4) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .(5) Where the [F632Director General], a [F641local policing body] or a chief officer gives notification of a complaint under any of sub-paragraphs (1) to (3) F642..., the person who gave the notification F643... shall notify the complainant—(a) that the notification has been given and of what it contained; orF644(b)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .(6) Where—(a) a [F645local policing body] determines, in the case of any complaint made to[F646the body], that it is itself the appropriate authority,(b) a chief officer determines, in the case of any complaint made to that chief officer, that he is himself the appropriate authority, or(c) a complaint is notified to a [F647local policing body] or chief officer under this paragraph,[F648the body] or chief officer shall [F649contact the complainant and seek the complainant's views on how the complaint should be handled].[F650(6A) A local policing body or chief officer that is subject to the duty in sub-paragraph (6) in relation to a complaint must record the complaint if—(a) at any time the complainant indicates a wish for the complaint to be recorded, or(b) the local policing body or chief officer determines that the complaint is to be handled in accordance with this Schedule.(6B) The local policing body or chief officer must determine that a complaint is to be handled in accordance with this Schedule if—
170	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc.Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(a) the complaint is one alleging that the conduct or other matter complained of has resulted in death or serious injury,(b) the complaint is one alleging that there has been conduct by a person serving with the police which (if proved) might constitute the commission of a criminal offence or justify the bringing of disciplinary proceedings,(c) the conduct or other matter complained of (if proved) might have involved the infringement of a person's rights under Article 2 or 3 of the Convention (within the meaning of the Human Rights Act 1998), or(d) the complaint is of a description specified for the purposes of paragraph 4(1)(b) in regulations made by the Secretary of State.(6C) Where a local policing body or chief officer determines (for the purposes of sub- paragraph (6A)) that a complaint is to be handled otherwise than in accordance with this Schedule, the local policing body or chief officer must handle the complaint in such other manner as the local policing body or chief officer considers appropriate with a view to resolving the complaint to the complainant's satisfaction.(The duty in this sub-paragraph ceases to apply if the complaint is recorded in accordance with sub-paragraph (6A)(a).)(6D) Where a local policing body or chief officer records a complaint under sub- paragraph (6A), or determines that a complaint is to be handled otherwise than in accordance with this Schedule, the local policing body or chief officer must notify the complainant of the recording of the complaint or (as the case may be) of the determination.][F651(7) Nothing in this paragraph shall require the taking of any action in relation to a complaint if the complaint has been withdrawn.]F652(8) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .[F653(9) If a local policing body or chief officer decides that it or (as the case may be) he is not required to comply with any of sub-paragraphs (2), (3) and (6) to (6C) on the basis of a determination that what purports to be a complaint is not a complaint, the local policing body or chief officer must notify the complainant of the determination and the grounds on which it was made.(10) If a local policing body or chief officer determines that part of what has been received (whether directly or by virtue of a notification under this paragraph) is a complaint and part is not, the local policing body or chief officer must proceed under this paragraph as if those two parts had been separately received.]
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc. Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
171
F639 Words in Sch. 3 para. 2(2) substituted (16.1.2012) by Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13), s. 157(1), Sch. 16 para. 300(3)(a); S.I. 2011/3019, art. 3, Sch. 1F640 Sch. 3 para. 2(4) omitted (16.1.2012 for specified purposes, 22.11.2012 in so far as not already in force) by virtue of Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13), s. 157(1), Sch. 14 para. 8(3); S.I. 2011/3019, art. 3, Sch. 1; S.I. 2012/2892, art. 2(g) (with art. 6)F641 Words in Sch. 3 para. 2(5) substituted (16.1.2012) by Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13), s. 157(1), Sch. 16 para. 300(3)(a); S.I. 2011/3019, art. 3, Sch. 1F642 Words in Sch. 3 para. 2(5) omitted (22.11.2012) by virtue of Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13), s. 157(1), Sch. 14 para. 8(4)(a)(i); S.I. 2012/2892, art. 2(g) (with art. 6)F643 Words in Sch. 3 para. 2(5) omitted (22.11.2012) by virtue of Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13), s. 157(1), Sch. 14 para. 8(4)(a)(ii); S.I. 2012/2892, art. 2(g) (with art. 6)F644 Sch. 3 para. 2(5)(b) omitted (22.11.2012) by virtue of Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13), s. 157(1), Sch. 14 para. 8(4)(b); S.I. 2012/2892, art. 2(g) (with art. 6)F645 Words in Sch. 3 para. 2(6)(a) substituted (16.1.2012) by Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13), s. 157(1), Sch. 16 para. 300(3)(b)(i); S.I. 2011/3019, art. 3, Sch. 1F646 Words in Sch. 3 para. 2(6)(a) substituted (16.1.2012) by Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13), s. 157(1), Sch. 16 para. 300(3)(b)(ii); S.I. 2011/3019, art. 3, Sch. 1F647 Words in Sch. 3 para. 2(6)(c) substituted (16.1.2012) by Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13), s. 157(1), Sch. 16 para. 300(3)(c); S.I. 2011/3019, art. 3, Sch. 1F648 Words in Sch. 3 para. 2(6) substituted (16.1.2012) by Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13), s. 157(1), Sch. 16 para. 300(3)(d); S.I. 2011/3019, art. 3, Sch. 1F649 Words in Sch. 3 para. 2(6) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 2(2); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))F650 Sch. 3 para. 2(6A)-(6D) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 2(3); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))F651 Sch. 3 para. 2(7) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 2(4); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))F652 Sch. 3 para. 2(8) omitted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by virtue of Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 2(5); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))F653 Sch. 3 para. 2(9)(10) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 2(6); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))Modifications etc. (not altering text)C89 Sch. 3 para. 2 applied (with modifications) (1.4.2006) by The Revenue and Customs (Complaints and Misconduct) Regulations 2005 (S.I. 2005/3311), reg. 3(5)(6), Sch. 3Commencement InformationI22  Sch. 3 para. 2 wholly in force at 1.4.2004; Sch. 3 para. 2 not in force at Royal Assent see s. 108(2); Sch. 3 para. 2 in force for specified purposes at 1.10.2002 by S.I. 2002/2306, art. 4(e); Sch. 3 para. 2 in force in so far as not already in force at 1.4.2004 by S.I. 2004/913, art. 2(d)
172	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc.Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesF654...F6543	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Reference of complaints to the [F632Director General]4  (1) It shall be the duty of the appropriate authority to refer a complaint to the [F632Director General] if—(a) the complaint is one alleging that the conduct [F655or other matter] complained of has resulted in death or serious injury;(b) the complaint is of a description specified for the purposes of this sub- paragraph in regulations made by the Secretary of State; or(c) the [F632Director General] notifies the appropriate authority that [F638the Director General] requires the complaint in question to be referred to the [F632Director General] for [F656the Director General's] consideration.(2) In a case where there is no obligation under sub-paragraph (1) to make a reference, the appropriate authority may refer a complaint to the [F632Director General] if that authority considers that it would be appropriate to do so so by reason of—(a) the gravity of the subject-matter of the complaint; or(b) any exceptional circumstances.(3) In a case in which a reference under sub-paragraph (1) or (2) is neither made nor required to be made, a [F657local policing body] may refer a complaint to the [F632Director General] if—(a) it is one in relation to which the chief officer of police of the police force maintained by [F658that body] is the appropriate authority; and(b) the [F657local policing body] considers that it would be appropriate to do so reason of—(i) the gravity of the subject-matter of the complaint; or(ii) any exceptional circumstances.(4) Where there is an obligation under this paragraph to refer a complaint to the [F632Director General], it must be so referred within such period as may be provided for by regulations made by the Secretary of State.(5) Subject to sub-paragraph (7), the following powers—(a) the power of the [F632Director General] by virtue of sub-paragraph (1)(c) to require a complaint to be referred to [F638the Director General], and(b) the power of a [F659local policing body] or chief officer to refer a complaint to the [F632Director General] under sub-paragraph (2) or (3),(a) 
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc. Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
173
shall each be exercisable at any time irrespective of whether the complaint is already being investigated by any person or has already been considered by the [F632Director General].[F660(5A) The power of an appropriate authority to refer a complaint to the [F632Director General] under sub-paragraph (2) is also exercisable after a complaint has been handled in accordance with this Schedule if a recommendation is made under paragraph 6A(6)(a) or 25(4E)(b) (recommendation on a review).](6) A [F661local policing body] or chief officer which refers a complaint to the [F632Director General] under this paragraph shall give a notification of the making of the reference—(a) to the complainant, and(b) except in a case where it appears to [F662that body] or chief officer that to do so might prejudice [F663an investigation of the complaint (whether an existing investigation or a possible future one)], to the person complained against [F664(if any)].[F665(6A) A local policing body which refers a complaint to the [F632Director General] under sub-paragraph (3) shall also give a notification of the making of the reference to the appropriate authority.](7) A complaint that has already been referred to the [F666Director General] under this paragraph on a previous occasion [F667, or that has been treated as having been so referred by virtue of paragraph 4A]—(a) shall not be required to be referred again under this paragraph unless the[F632Director General] so directs; and(b) shall not be referred in exercise of any power conferred by this paragraph unless the [F632Director General] consents.F668(8) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .[F669(9) The appropriate authority must record any complaint that is referred to the[F632Director General] under this paragraph that has not already been recorded.]
174	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc.Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesF660 Sch. 3 para. 4(5A) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 30; S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))F661 Words in Sch. 3 para. 4(6) substituted (16.1.2012) by Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13), s. 157(1), Sch. 16 para. 300(5)(c)(i); S.I. 2011/3019, art. 3, Sch. 1F662 Words in Sch. 3 para. 4(6)(b) substituted (16.1.2012) by Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13), s. 157(1), Sch. 16 para. 300(5)(c)(ii); S.I. 2011/3019, art. 3, Sch. 1F663 Words in Sch. 3 para. 4(6)(b) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 4(2); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))F664 Words in Sch. 3 para. 4(6)(b) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 4 para. 7(4); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(m) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))F665 Sch. 3 para. 4(6A) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 4(3); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))F666 Words in Sch. 3 substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 56(3) (with Sch. 9 para. 56(6)); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)F667 Words in Sch. 3 para. 4(7) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), ss. 17(2), 183(1)(5)(e); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(e) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))F668 Sch. 3 para. 4(8) omitted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by virtue of Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 4(4); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))F669 Sch. 3 para. 4(9) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 4(5); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))Modifications etc. (not altering text)C90 Sch. 3 para. 4 applied (with modifications) (1.4.2006) by The Revenue and Customs (Complaints and Misconduct) Regulations 2005 (S.I. 2005/3311), reg. 3(5)(6), Sch. 3Commencement InformationI23  Sch. 3 para. 4 wholly in force at 1.4.2004; Sch. 3 para. 4 not in force at Royal Assent see s. 108(2); Sch. 3 para. 4 in force for specified purposes at 1.10.2002 by S.I. 2002/2306, art. 4(e); Sch. 3 para. 4 in force in so far as not already in force at 1.4.2004 by S.I. 2004/913, art. 2(d)[F670Power of [F632Director General] to treat complaint as having been referred4A (1) The [F632Director General] may treat a complaint that comes to [F656the Director General's] attention otherwise than by having been referred to [F638the Director General] under paragraph 4 as having been so referred.
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc. Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
175
(2) Where the [F632Director General] treats a complaint as having been referred to [F638the Director General]—(a) paragraphs 2 and 4 do not apply, or cease to apply, in relation to the complaint except to the extent provided for by paragraph 4(7), and(b) paragraphs 5, 6, 6A, 15 and 25 apply in relation to the complaint as if it had been referred to the [F632Director General] by the appropriate authority under paragraph 4.(3) The [F632Director General] must notify the following that [F638the Director General] is treating a complaint as having been referred to [F638the Director General]—(a) the appropriate authority;(b) the complainant;(c) except in a case where it appears to the [F632Director General] that to do so might prejudice an investigation of the complaint (whether an existing investigation or a possible future one), the person complained against (if any).(4) Where an appropriate authority receives a notification under sub-paragraph (3) in respect of a complaint and the complaint has not yet been recorded, the appropriate authority must record the complaint.]Duties of [F632Director General] on references under paragraph 45  (1) It shall be the duty of the [F632Director General] in the case of every complaint referred to [F638the Director General] by a [F671local policing body] or chief officer, to determine whether or not it is necessary for the complaint to be investigated.[F672(1A) The Secretary of State may by regulations provide that the [F632Director General] must determine that it is necessary for complaints referred to [F638the Director General] that relate to the conduct of a chief officer or the Deputy Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis to be investigated.(1B) Regulations under sub-paragraph (1A) may provide that the duty on the [F632Director General] applies only in relation to complaints relating to the conduct of a chief officer or the Deputy Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis that are of a description specified in the regulations.(1C) Regulations under sub-paragraph (1A) may also provide that, where the [F632Director General] is required by the regulations to determine that it is necessary for a
176	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc.Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changescomplaint to be investigated, paragraph 15 is to apply in relation to the complaint as if sub-paragraphs (4)(a), (4A) and (5A)(b) were omitted.](2) Where the [F632Director General] determines under this paragraph that it is not necessary for a complaint to be investigated [F673—(a) in a case where the complaint is already being investigated by the appropriate authority on its own behalf (and notwithstanding the [F666Director General's] determination), the [F632Director General] must refer the complaint back to the appropriate authority for the investigation to be completed, and(b) in any other case, the [F632Director General] may, if [F638the Director General] thinks fit, refer the complaint back to the appropriate authority to be dealt with by that authority in accordance with paragraph 6.](3) Where the [F632Director General] refers a complaint back under sub-paragraph (2), [F638the Director General] shall give a notification of the making of the reference back—(a) to the complainant, and(b) except in a case where it appears to the [F632Director General] that to do so might prejudice [F674an investigation of the complaint (whether an existing investigation or a possible future one)], to the person complained against [F675(if any)].
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc. Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
177
Handling of complaints by the appropriate authority[F6766 (1) This paragraph applies where a complaint has been recorded by the appropriate authority.(2) But this paragraph does not apply to a complaint if it is one that has been, or must be, referred to the [F632Director General] under paragraph 4, unless the complaint is for the time being—   (a) referred back to the authority under paragraph [F6775(2)(b)], F678... F679(b)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .[F680(2A) The appropriate authority must handle the complaint in such reasonable and proportionate manner as the authority determines.(2B) An appropriate authority may handle a complaint in accordance with sub- paragraph (2A) by (amongst other things)—(a) making arrangements for the complaint to be investigated by the authority on its own behalf;(b) notifying the complainant that no further action is to be taken in relation to the complaint.(2C) The appropriate authority must comply with its duty under sub-paragraph (2A) by making arrangements for the complaint to be investigated by the authority on its own behalf if at any time it appears to the authority from the complaint, or from the authority's handling of the complaint to that point, that there is an indication that—(a) a person serving with the police may have committed a criminal offence or behaved in a manner that would justify the bringing of disciplinary proceedings, or(b) there may have been the infringement of a person's rights under Article 2 or 3 of the Convention (within the meaning of the Human Rights Act 1998).(2D) The Secretary of State may by regulations provide for the duty in sub-paragraph (2C) to be subject to exceptions.(2E) A statement made by any person for the purposes of the handling of any complaint in accordance with sub-paragraph (2A) otherwise than by the appropriate authority making arrangements for the complaint to be investigated by the authority on its own behalf is not admissible in any subsequent criminal, civil or disciplinary proceedings except to the extent that it consists of an admission relating to a matter that has not been subjected to such handling.]F681(3) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .F681(4) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .F681(5) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .F681(6) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
178	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc.Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesF681(7) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .F681(8) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .F681(9) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .F681(10) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .F681(11)	][F682Reviews relating to complaints dealt with other than by investigation6A  (1) This paragraph applies where a complaint is handled by the appropriate authority in accordance with paragraph 6(2A) otherwise than by the authority making arrangements for the complaint to be investigated by the authority on its own behalf.(2) The complainant has the right to apply to the relevant review body for a review of the outcome of the complaint.(3) The relevant review body must notify the following of an application for a review under sub-paragraph (2)—(a) the appropriate authority,(a) 
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc. Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
179
(b) every person entitled to be kept properly informed in relation to the complaint under section 21, and(c) the person complained against (if any).(4) On a review applied for under sub-paragraph (2), the relevant review body must determine whether the outcome is a reasonable and proportionate outcome.(5) Where the [F632Director General] is the relevant review body and the [F632Director General] finds that the outcome is not a reasonable and proportionate outcome, the [F632Director General] may—(a) determine that it is necessary for the complaint to be investigated;(b) make a recommendation under paragraph 28ZA.(6) Where a local policing body is the relevant review body and the local policing body finds that the outcome is not a reasonable and proportionate outcome, the local policing body may—(a) where the complaint has not previously been referred to the [F632Director General] under paragraph 4, make a recommendation to the appropriate authority that it refer the complaint to the [F632Director General] under sub- paragraph (2) of that paragraph;(b) make a recommendation to the appropriate authority that it make arrangements for the complaint to be investigated by the authority on its own behalf;(c) make a recommendation under paragraph 28ZA.(7) The Secretary of State may by regulations make further provision about recommendations under sub-paragraph (6)(a) or (b).(8) The regulations may (amongst other things) authorise the local policing body making the recommendation to require a response to the recommendation.(9) The relevant review body must give notification of the outcome of a review under this paragraph and of its reasons for the determination made under sub-paragraph (4)—(a) to the appropriate authority,(b) to the complainant,(c) to every person entitled to be kept properly informed in relation to the complaint under section 21, and(d) except in a case where it appears to the relevant review body that to do so might prejudice any investigation of the complaint, to the person complained against (if any).(10) In this paragraph references to the outcome of a complaint do not include the outcome of any criminal or disciplinary proceedings brought in relation to any matter which was the subject of the complaint.]
180	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc.Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesF683...F6837	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .F684...F6848	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .F685...F6858A	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .PART 2HANDLING OF CONDUCT MATTERSConduct matters arising in civil proceedings10   (1) This paragraph applies where—(a) a [F686local policing body] or chief officer has received notification (whether or not under this paragraph) that civil proceedings relating to any matter have been brought by a member of the public against [F687that body] or chief officer, or it otherwise appears to a [F686local policing body] or chief officer that such proceedings are likely to be so brought; and(b) it appears to [F687that body] or chief officer (whether at the time of the notification or at any time subsequently) that those proceedings involve or would involve a conduct matter.(2) [F688The authority] or chief officer—(2) 
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc. Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
181
(a) shall consider whether it or, as the case may be, he is the appropriate authority in relation to the conduct matter in question; and(b) if it or he is not, shall notify the person who is the appropriate authority about the proceedings, or the proposal to bring them, and about the circumstances that make it appear as mentioned in sub-paragraph (1)(b).(3) Where a [F689local policing body] or chief officer determines for the purposes of this paragraph that it or, as the case may be, he is the appropriate authority in relation to any conduct matter, it or he shall [F690determine whether the matter is one which it or he is required to refer to the [F632Director General] under paragraph 13 or is one which it would be appropriate to so refer].[F691(4) In a case where the appropriate authority determines that the matter is one which it or he is required to refer to the [F632Director General] under paragraph 13, or is one which it would be appropriate to so refer, it or he shall record the matter.(4A) In any other case, the appropriate authority shall determine whether the matter falls within a description of matters specified in regulations made by the Secretary of State for the purposes of this sub-paragraph.(4B) In a case where the appropriate authority determines that the matter does not fall within such a description, it or he shall record the matter.(4C) In any other case, the appropriate authority may (but need not) record the matter. (4D) In a case where the appropriate authority—(a) records a matter under this paragraph, and(b) is not required to refer the matter to the [F632Director General] under paragraph 13 and does not do so,the appropriate authority may deal with the matter in such other manner (if any) as it or he may determine.](5) Nothing in [F692sub-paragraph (4) or (4B)] shall require the appropriate authority to record any conduct matter if it is satisfied that the matter has been, or is already being, dealt with by means of criminal or disciplinary proceedings against the person to whose conduct the matter relates.(6) For the purposes of this paragraph civil proceedings involve a conduct matter if—(a) they relate to such a matter; or(b) they are proceedings that relate to a matter in relation to which a conduct matter, or evidence of a conduct matter, is or may be relevant.(7) The Secretary of State may by regulations provide for the times at which, or the periods within which, any requirement of this paragraph is to be complied with; and the period from which any such period is to run shall be such time as may be specified in those regulations or as may be determined in a manner set out in the regulations.
182	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc.Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesRecording etc. of conduct matters in other cases11   (1) [F693This paragraph applies where—](a) a conduct matter comes (otherwise than as mentioned in paragraph 10) to the attention of the [F694local policing body] or chief officer who is the appropriate authority in relation to that matter, and(b) it appears to the appropriate authority that the conduct involved in that matter falls within sub-paragraph (2),F695. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .(2) Conduct falls within this sub-paragraph if (assuming it to have taken place)—(a) it appears to have resulted in the death of any person or in serious injury to any person;(b) a member of the public has been adversely affected by it; or(c) it is of a description specified for the purposes of this sub-paragraph in regulations made by the Secretary of State.[F696(3) The appropriate authority must determine whether the matter is one which it or he is required to refer to the [F632Director General] under paragraph 13, or is one which it would be appropriate to so refer.(3A) In a case where the appropriate authority determines that the matter is one which it or he is required to refer to the [F632Director General] under paragraph 13, or is one which it would be appropriate to so refer, it or he shall record the matter.
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc. Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
183
(3B) In any other case, the appropriate authority shall determine whether the matter falls within a description of matters specified in regulations made by the Secretary of State for the purposes of this sub-paragraph.(3C) In a case where the appropriate authority determines that the matter does not fall within such a description, it or he shall record the matter.(3D) In any other case, the appropriate authority may (but need not) record the matter. (3E) In a case where the appropriate authority—(a) records a matter under this paragraph, and(b) is not required to refer the matter to the [F632Director General] under paragraph 13 and does not do so,the appropriate authority may deal with the matter in such other manner (if any) as it or he may determine.](4) Nothing in [F697sub-paragraph (3A) or (3C)] shall require the appropriate authority to record any conduct matter if it is satisfied that the matter has been, or is already being, dealt with by means of criminal or disciplinary proceedings against the person to whose conduct the matter relates.F698(5) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
184	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc.Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesDuties to preserve evidence relating to conduct matters12  (1) Where a recordable conduct matter that relates to the conduct of a chief officer comes to the attention of the [F699local policing body] maintaining his force, it shall be the duty of [F700that body] to secure that all such steps as are appropriate for the purposes of Part 2 of this Act are taken, both initially and from time to time after that, for obtaining and preserving evidence relating to that matter.(2) Where a chief officer becomes aware of any recordable conduct matter relating to the conduct of a person under his direction and control, it shall be his duty to take all such steps as appear to him to be appropriate for the purposes of Part 2 of this Act for obtaining and preserving evidence relating to that matter.(3) The chief officer’s duty under sub-paragraph (2) must be performed as soon as practicable after he becomes aware of the matter in question.(4) After that, he shall be under a duty, until he is satisfied that it is no longer necessary to do so, to continue to take the steps from time to time appearing to him to be appropriate for the purposes of Part 2 of this Act for obtaining and preserving evidence relating to the matter.(5) It shall be the duty of a [F701local policing body] to comply with all such directions as may be given to it by the [F632Director General] in relation to the performance of any duty imposed on it by virtue of sub-paragraph (1).(6) It shall be the duty of the chief officer to take all such specific steps for obtaining or preserving evidence relating to any recordable conduct matter as he may be directed to take for the purposes of this paragraph by the [F702local policing body] maintaining his force or by the [F632Director General].
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc. Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
185
Reference of conduct matters to the [F632Director General]13  (1) It shall be the duty of a [F703local policing body] or a chief officer to refer a recordable conduct matter to the [F632Director General] if, in a case (whether or not falling within paragraph 10) in which [F704the body] or chief officer is the appropriate authority—(a) that matter relates to any incident or circumstances in or in consequence of which any person has died or suffered serious injury;(b) that matter is of a description specified for the purposes of this sub-paragraph in regulations made by the Secretary of State; or(c) the [F632Director General] notifies the appropriate authority that [F638the Director General] requires that matter to be referred to the [F632Director General] for [F656the Director General's] consideration.(2) In any case where there is no obligation under sub-paragraph (1) to make a reference, the appropriate authority may refer a recordable conduct matter to the [F632Director General] if that authority considers that it would be appropriate to do so by reason of—(a) the gravity of the matter; or(b) any exceptional circumstances.(3) In a case in which a reference under sub-paragraph (1) or (2) is neither made nor required to be made, a [F705local policing body] maintaining any police force may refer any recordable conduct matter to the [F632Director General] if—(a) it is one in relation to which the chief officer of police of that force is the appropriate authority; and(b) the [F706local policing body] considers that it would be appropriate to do so by reason of—(i) the gravity of the matter; or(ii) any exceptional circumstances.(4) Where there is an obligation under this paragraph to refer any matter to the [F632Director General], it must be so referred within such period as may be provided for by regulations made by the Secretary of State.(5) Subject to sub-paragraph (7), the following powers—(a) the power of the [F632Director General] by virtue of sub-paragraph (1)(c) to require a matter to be referred to [F638the Director General], and(b) the power of a [F707local policing body] or chief officer to refer any matter to the [F632Director General] under sub-paragraph (2) or (3),shall each be exercisable at any time irrespective of whether the matter is already being investigated by any person or has already been considered by the [F632Director General].(6) Where—(2) 
186	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc.Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(a) a [F708local policing body] or chief officer refers a matter to the [F632Director General] under this paragraph, and(b) [F709that body] or chief officer does not consider that to do so might prejudice [F710an investigation of that matter (whether an existing investigation or a possible future one)],[F709that body] or chief officer shall give a notification of the making of the reference to the person to whose conduct that matter relates.(7) A matter that has already been referred to the [F632Director General] under this paragraph on a previous occasion [F711, or that has been treated as having been so referred by virtue of paragraph 13A]—(a) shall not be required to be referred again under this paragraph unless the[F632Director General] so directs; and(b) shall not be referred in exercise of any power conferred by this paragraph unless the [F632Director General] consents.Textual AmendmentsF638 Words in Sch. 3 substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 56(4) (with Sch. 9 para. 56(6)); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)F656 Words in Sch. 3 substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 56(5) (with Sch. 9 para. 56(6)); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)F703 Words in Sch. 3 para. 13(1) substituted (16.1.2012) by Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13), s. 157(1), Sch. 16 para. 301(5)(a)(i); S.I. 2011/3019, art. 3, Sch. 1F704 Words in Sch. 3 para. 13(1) substituted (16.1.2012) by Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13), s. 157(1), Sch. 16 para. 301(5)(a)(ii); S.I. 2011/3019, art. 3, Sch. 1F705 Words in Sch. 3 para. 13(3) substituted (16.1.2012) by Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13), s. 157(1), Sch. 16 para. 301(5)(b)(i); S.I. 2011/3019, art. 3, Sch. 1F706 Words in Sch. 3 para. 13(3)(b) substituted (16.1.2012) by Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13), s. 157(1), Sch. 16 para. 301(5)(b)(ii); S.I. 2011/3019, art. 3, Sch. 1F707 Words in Sch. 3 para. 13(5)(b) substituted (16.1.2012) by Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13), s. 157(1), Sch. 16 para. 301(5)(c); S.I. 2011/3019, art. 3, Sch. 1F708 Words in Sch. 3 para. 13(6) substituted (16.1.2012) by Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13), s. 157(1), Sch. 16 para. 301(5)(d)(i); S.I. 2011/3019, art. 3, Sch. 1F709 Words in Sch. 3 para. 13(6) substituted (16.1.2012) by Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13), s. 157(1), Sch. 16 para. 301(5)(d)(ii); S.I. 2011/3019, art. 3, Sch. 1F710 Words in Sch. 3 para. 13(6)(b) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 12; S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))F711 Words in Sch. 3 para. 13(7) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), ss. 17(5), 183(1)(5)(e); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(e) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))Modifications etc. (not altering text)C97 Sch. 3 para. 13 applied (with modifications) (28.12.2005) by virtue of The Revenue and Customs (Complaints and Misconduct) Regulations 2005 (S.I. 2005/3311), reg. 3(4)(6), Sch. 3
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc. Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
187
[F712Power of [F632Director General] to treat conduct matter as having been referred13A (1) The [F632Director General] may treat a conduct matter that comes to [F656the Director General's] attention otherwise than by having been referred to [F638the Director General] under paragraph 13 as having been so referred.(2) Where the [F632Director General] treats a conduct matter as having been referred to[F638the Director General]—(a) paragraphs 10, 11 and 13 do not apply, or cease to apply, in relation to the matter except to the extent provided for by paragraph 13(7), and(b) paragraphs 14 and 15 apply in relation to the matter as if it had been referred to the [F632Director General] by the appropriate authority under paragraph 13.(3) The [F632Director General] must notify the following that [F638the Director General] is treating a conduct matter as having been referred to [F638the Director General]—(a) the appropriate authority;(b) except in a case where it appears to the [F632Director General] that to do so might prejudice an investigation of the matter (whether an existing investigation or a possible future one), the person to whose conduct the matter relates.(4) Where an appropriate authority receives a notification under sub-paragraph (3) in respect of a conduct matter and the matter has not yet been recorded, the appropriate authority must record the matter.]Duties of [F632Director General] on references under paragraph 1314	(1) It shall be the duty of the [F632Director General], in the case of every recordable conduct matter referred to [F638the Director General] by a [F713local policing body]
188	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc.Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesor chief officer under paragraph 13, to determine whether or not it is necessary for the matter to be investigated.[F714(1A) The Secretary of State may by regulations provide that the [F632Director General] must determine that it is necessary for recordable conduct matters referred to [F638the Director General] that relate to the conduct of a chief officer or the Deputy Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis to be investigated.(1B) Regulations under sub-paragraph (1A) may provide that the duty on the [F632Director General] applies only in relation to recordable conduct matters relating to the conduct of a chief officer or the Deputy Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis that are of a description specified in the regulations.(1C) Regulations under sub-paragraph (1A) may also provide that, where the [F632Director General] is required by the regulations to determine that it is necessary for a recordable conduct matter to be investigated, paragraph 15 is to apply in relation to the matter as if sub-paragraphs (4)(a), (4A) and (5A)(b) were omitted.](2) Where the [F632Director General] determines under this paragraph that it is not necessary for a recordable conduct matter to be investigated [F715—(a) in a case where the recordable conduct matter is already being investigated by the appropriate authority on its own behalf (and notwithstanding the [F666Director General's] determination), the [F632 Director General] must refer the matter back to the appropriate authority for the investigation to becompleted, and(b) in any other case, the [F632Director General] may, if [F638the Director General] thinks fit, refer the matter back to the appropriate authority to be dealt with by that authority in such manner (if any) as that authority may determine.](3) Where—(a) the [F632Director General] refers a matter back to the appropriate authority under this paragraph, and(b) the [F632Director General] does not consider that to do so might prejudice [F716an investigation of that matter (whether an existing investigation or a possible future one)],the [F632Director General] shall give a notification of the making of the reference to the person to whose conduct that matter relates.
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc. Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
189
[F717PART 2AHANDLING OF DEATH AND SERIOUS INJURY (DSI) MATTERSDuty to record DSI matters14A (1) Where a DSI matter comes to the attention of the [F718local policing body] or chief officer who is the appropriate authority in relation to that matter, it shall be the duty of the appropriate authority to record that matter.F719(2) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Duty to preserve evidence relating to DSI matters14B	(1) Where—(a) a DSI matter comes to the attention of a [F720local policing body] , and(a) 
190	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc.Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(b) the relevant officer in relation to that matter is the chief officer of the force maintained by [F721that body],it shall be the duty of [F721that body] to secure that all such steps as are appropriate for the purposes of Part 2 of this Act are taken, both initially and from time to time after that, for obtaining and preserving evidence relating to that matter.(2) Where—(a) a chief officer becomes aware of a DSI matter, and(b) the relevant officer in relation to that matter is a person under his direction and control,it shall be his duty to take all such steps as appear to him to be appropriate for the purposes of Part 2 of this Act for obtaining and preserving evidence relating to that matter.(3) The chief officer's duty under sub-paragraph (2) must be performed as soon as practicable after he becomes aware of the matter in question.(4) After that, he shall be under a duty, until he is satisfied that it is no longer necessary to do so, to continue to take the steps from time to time appearing to him to be appropriate for the purposes of Part 2 of this Act for obtaining and preserving evidence relating to the matter.(5) It shall be the duty of a [F722local policing body] to comply with all such directions as may be given to it by the [F632Director General] in relation to the performance of any duty imposed on it by virtue of sub-paragraph (1).(6) It shall be the duty of the chief officer to take all such specific steps for obtaining or preserving evidence relating to any DSI matter as he may be directed to take for the purposes of this paragraph by the [F723local policing body] maintaining his force or by the [F632Director General].
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc. Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
191
Reference of DSI matters to the [F632Director General]14C	(1) It shall be the duty of the appropriate authority to refer a DSI matter to the[F632Director General].(2) The appropriate authority must do so within such period as may be provided for by regulations made by the Secretary of State.(3) A matter that has already been referred to the [F632Director General] under this paragraph on a previous occasion [F724, or that has been treated as having been so referred by virtue of paragraph 14CA,] shall not be required to be referred again under this paragraph unless the [F632Director General] so directs.[F725Power of [F632Director General] to treat DSI matter as having been referred14CA (1) The [F632Director General] may treat a DSI matter that comes to [F656the Director General's] attention otherwise than by having been referred to [F638the Director General] under paragraph 14C as having been so referred.(2) Where the [F632Director General] treats a DSI matter as having been referred to[F638the Director General]—(a) paragraphs 14A and 14C do not apply, or cease to apply, in relation to the matter except to the extent provided for by paragraph 14C(3), and(b) paragraphs 14D and 15 apply in relation to the matter as if it had been referred to the [F632Director General] by the appropriate authority under paragraph 14C.(3) The [F632Director General] must notify the appropriate authority that [F638the Director General] is treating a DSI matter as having been referred to [F638the Director General].(4) Where an appropriate authority receives a notification under sub-paragraph (3) in respect of a DSI matter and the matter has not yet been recorded, the appropriate authority must record the matter.](2) 
192	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc.Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesDuties of [F632Director General] on references under paragraph 14C14D (1) It shall be the duty of the [F632Director General], in the case of every DSI matter referred to [F638the Director General] by a [F726local policing body] or a chief officer, to determine whether or not it is necessary for the matter to be investigated.      [ The Secretary of State may by regulations provide that the [F632Director General] F727(1A) must determine that it is necessary for DSI matters referred to [F638the Director General] in relation to which the relevant officer is a chief officer or the DeputyCommissioner of Police of the Metropolis to be investigated.(1B) Regulations under sub-paragraph (1A) may provide that the duty on the [F632Director General] applies only in relation to DSI matters in relation to which the relevant officer is a chief officer or the Deputy Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis that are of a description specified in the regulations.(1C) Regulations under sub-paragraph (1A) may also provide that, where the [F632Director General] is required by the regulations to determine that it is necessary for a DSI matter to be investigated, paragraph 15 is to apply in relation to the matter as if sub- paragraphs (4)(a), (4A) and (5A)(b) were omitted.](2) Where the [F632Director General] determines under this paragraph that it is not necessary for a DSI matter to be investigated [F728—(a) in a case where the DSI matter is already being investigated by the appropriate authority on its own behalf (and notwithstanding the [F666Director General's] determination), the [F632Director General] must refer the matter back to the appropriate authority for the investigation to becompleted, and(b) in any other case, the [F632Director General] may, if [F638the Director General] thinks fit, refer the matter back to the appropriate authority to be dealt with by that authority in such manner (if any) as that authority may determine.]]
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc. Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
193
PART 3INVESTIGATIONS AND SUBSEQUENT PROCEEDINGSPower of the [F632Director General] to determine the form of an investigation15	(1) This paragraph applies where—(a) a complaint [F729, recordable conduct matter or DSI matter] is referred to the[F632Director General]; and(b) the [F632Director General] determines [F730under paragraph 5(1), 14(1) or 14D(1)] that it is necessary for the complaint or matter to be investigated.[F731(1A) This paragraph also applies where the [F632Director General] determines under paragraph 6A(5)(a) that it is necessary for a complaint to be investigated.](2) It shall be the duty of the [F632Director General] to determine the form which the investigation should take.F732(3) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .(4) The only forms which the investigation may take in accordance with a determination made under this paragraph are—(a)	an investigation by the appropriate authority on its own behalf;F733(b)	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .(c) an investigation by that authority under the [F734direction] of the [F632Director General];(d) an investigation by the [F632Director General].[F735(4A) In making a determination under sub-paragraph (2) the [F632Director General] must first determine whether, having regard to the seriousness of the case and the public interest, it is appropriate for the investigation to take the form of an investigation by the appropriate authority on its own behalf and if it is the [F632Director General] mustdetermine that the investigation is to take that form.(4B) Where, in accordance with sub-paragraph (4A), the [F632Director General] determines that it is not appropriate for the investigation to take the form of an investigation by the appropriate authority on its own behalf, the [F632Director General] must determine that the investigation is to take the form of an investigation by the [F632Director General] unless sub-paragraph (4C) applies.
194	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc.Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(4C) This sub-paragraph applies where the [F632Director General] determines that it would be more appropriate for the investigation to take the form of an investigation by the appropriate authority under the direction of the [F632Director General], in which case the [F632Director General] must determine that the investigation is to take that form.][F736(5) Where the [F632Director General] determines under sub-paragraph (4C) or (5B) that an investigation is to take the form of an investigation by the appropriate authority under the direction of the [F632Director General], the [F632Director General] must keep under review whether that form of investigation continues to be the most appropriateform of investigation.(5A) If, on such a review, the [F632Director General] determines that—(a) it would be more appropriate for the investigation to take the form of an investigation by the [F632Director General], the [F632Director General] must make a further determination under this paragraph (to replace the earlier one) that the investigation is instead to take that form;(b) having regard to the seriousness of the case and the public interest, it would be more appropriate for the investigation to take the form of an investigation by the appropriate authority on its own behalf, the [F632Director General] may make a further determination under this paragraph (to replace the earlier one)that the investigation is instead to take that form.(5B) Subject to sub-paragraph (5A), if at any time the [F632Director General] determines that, were [F638the Director General] to apply sub-paragraphs (4A) to (4C) again, the form of the investigation would be different, the [F632Director General] may make a further determination under this paragraph (to replace the earlier one) such that the investigation takes that different form.](6) Where a determination under this paragraph replaces an earlier determination under this paragraph, or relates to a complaint or matter in relation to which the appropriate authority has already begun an investigation on its own behalf, the [F632Director General] may give—(a) the appropriate authority, and(b) any person previously appointed to carry out the investigation,such directions as [F638the Director General] considers appropriate for the purpose of giving effect to the new determination.(7) It shall be the duty of a person to whom a direction is given under sub-paragraph (6) to comply with it.(8) The [F632Director General] shall notify the appropriate authority of any determination that [F638the Director General] makes under this paragraph in relation to a particular complaint [F729, recordable conduct matter or DSI matter][F737and of [F656the Director General's] reasons for making the determination].[F738(9) The [F632Director General] shall also notify the following of any determination that [F638the Director General] makes under this paragraph in relation to a particular complaint, recordable conduct matter or DSI matter and of [F656the Director General's] reasons for making the determination—(a) every person entitled to be kept properly informed in relation to the complaint or matter under section 21;(a) 
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc. Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
195
(b) where the determination is made in relation to a complaint, the complainant;(c) the person to whose conduct the investigation will relate.(10) The duty imposed by sub-paragraph (9) on the [F632Director General] in relation to a complaint, recordable conduct matter or DSI matter shall have effect subject to such exceptions as may be provided for by regulations made by the Secretary of State.(11) Subsections (6) to (8) of section 20 apply for the purposes of sub-paragraph (10) as they apply for the purposes of that section.]Textual AmendmentsF638 Words in Sch. 3 substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 56(4) (with Sch. 9 para. 56(6)); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)F656 Words in Sch. 3 substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 56(5) (with Sch. 9 para. 56(6)); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)F729 Words in Sch. 3 para. 15(1)(a)(8) substituted (1.7.2005) by Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15), ss. 160, 178, Sch. 12 para. 13; S.I. 2005/1521, art. 3(1)(w)F730 Words in Sch. 3 para. 15(1)(b) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 15(2); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))F731 Sch. 3 para. 15(1A) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 15(3); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))F732 Sch. 3 para. 15(3) omitted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by virtue of Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 15(4); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))F733 Sch. 3 para. 15(4)(b) omitted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by virtue of Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 15(5)(a); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))F734 Word in Sch. 3 para. 15(4)(c) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 15(5)(b); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))F735 Sch. 3 para. 15(4A)-(4C) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 15(6); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))F736 Sch. 3 para. 15(5)-(5B) substituted for Sch. 3para. 15(5) (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 15(7);S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))F737 Words in Sch. 3 para. 15(8) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 15(8); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))F738 Sch. 3 para. 15(9)-(11) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 15(9); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))Modifications etc. (not altering text)C103 Sch. 3 para. 15 applied (with modifications) (28.12.2005) by virtue of The Revenue and Customs (Complaints and Misconduct) Regulations 2005 (S.I. 2005/3311), reg. 3(4)(6), Sch. 3
196	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc.Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesInvestigations by the appropriate authority on its own behalf1[6F739(A1) This paragraph applies if the appropriate authority, acting in accordance with paragraph 6(2A) or in response to a recommendation under paragraph 6A(6)(b), is to make arrangements for a complaint to be investigated by the appropriate authority on its own behalf.](1) This paragraph [F740also] applies if the appropriate authority is required by virtue of—F741(a)	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .(b)	any determination made by the [F632Director General] under paragraph 15,to make arrangements for a complaint[F742, recordable conduct matter or DSI matter] to be investigated by the appropriate authority on its own behalf.(2) This paragraph also applies if—(a) a determination falls to be made by that authority under paragraph [F74310(4D)], or [F74411(3E)] or 14(2) in relation to any recordable conduct matter [F745or under paragraph 14D(2) in relation to any DSI matter]; and(b) the appropriate authority determine that it is necessary for the matter to be investigated by the authority on its own behalf.(3) Subject to sub-paragraph (4) [F746or (5)], it shall be the duty of the appropriate authority to appoint—(a) a person serving with the police (whether under the direction and control of the chief officer of police of the relevant force or of the chief officer of another force), or[F747(d) a National Crime Agency officer,] to investigate the complaint or matter.(4) The person appointed under this paragraph to investigate any complaint or[F748conduct matter]—(a) in the case of an investigation relating to any conduct of a chief officer, must not be a person under that chief officer’s direction and control; and(b) in the case of an investigation relating to any conduct of the Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis or of the Deputy Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis, must be the person nominated by the Secretary of State for appointment under this paragraph.[F749(5) The person appointed under this paragraph to investigate any DSI matter—(a) in relation to which the relevant officer is a chief officer, must not be a person under that chief officer's direction and control;(b) in relation to which the relevant officer is the Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis or the Deputy Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis, must be the person nominated by the Secretary of State for appointment under this paragraph.](a) 
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc. Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
197
Textual AmendmentsF632 Words in Sch. 3 substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 56(2) (with Sch. 9 para. 56(6)); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)F739 Sch. 3 para. 16(A1) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 16(2); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))F740 Word in Sch. 3 para. 16(1) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 16(3)(a); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))F741 Sch. 3 para. 16(1)(a) omitted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by virtue of Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 16(3)(b); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))F742 Words in Sch. 3 para. 16(1) substituted (1.7.2005) by Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15), ss. 160, 178, Sch. 12 para. 14(2); S.I. 2005/1521, art. 3(1)(w)F743 Words in Sch. 3 para. 16(2)(a) substituted (22.11.2012) by Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13), s. 157(1), Sch. 14 para. 11(5); S.I. 2012/2892, art. 2(g) (with art. 6)F744 Words in Sch. 3 para. 16(2)(a) substituted (22.11.2012) by Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13), s. 157(1), Sch. 14 para. 12(5); S.I. 2012/2892, art. 2(g) (with art. 6)F745 Words in Sch. 3 para. 16(2)(a) inserted (1.7.2005) by Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15), ss. 160, 178, Sch. 12 para. 14(3); S.I. 2005/1521, art. 3(1)(w)F746 Words in Sch. 3 para. 16(3) inserted (1.7.2005) by Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15),ss. 160, 178, Sch. 12 para. 14(4); S.I. 2005/1521, art. 3(1)(w)F747 Sch. 3 para. 16(3)(d) substituted for Sch. 3 para. 16(3)(b)(c) Sch. 3 (7.10.2013) by Crime and Courts Act 2013 (c. 22), s. 61(2), Sch. 6 para. 17(2); S.I. 2013/1682, art. 3(q)F748 Words in Sch. 3 para. 16(4) substituted (1.7.2005) by Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15), ss. 160, 178, Sch. 12 para. 14(5); S.I. 2005/1521, art. 3(1)(w)F749 Sch. 3 para. 16(5) added (1.7.2005) by Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15), ss. 160,178, Sch. 12 para. 14(6); S.I. 2005/1521, art. 3(1)(w)Modifications etc. (not altering text)C104 Sch. 3 para. 16 applied (with modifications) (E.W.) (28.12.2005) by virtue of The Revenue and Customs (Complaints and Misconduct) Regulations 2005 (S.I. 2005/3311), reg. 3(4)(6), Sch. 3Commencement InformationI31  Sch. 3 para. 16 wholly in force at 1.4.2004; Sch. 3 para. 16 not in force at Royal Assent see s. 108(2); Sch. 3 para. 16 in force for specified purposes at 1.10.2002 by S.I. 2002/2306, art. 4(e); Sch. 3 para. 16 in force in so far as not already in force at 1.4.2004 by S.I. 2004/913, art. 2(d)F750...F75017	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
198	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc.Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesInvestigations [F751directed] by the [F632Director General]18 (1) This paragraph applies where the [F632Director General] has determined that [F638the Director General] should [F752direct] the investigation by the appropriate authority of any complaint [F753, recordable conduct matter or DSI matter].[F754(2) On being given notice of that determination, the appropriate authority shall, if it has not already done so, appoint—(a) a person serving with the police (whether under the direction and control of the chief officer of police of the relevant force or of the chief officer of another force), or  (b) a National Crime Agency officer, to investigate the complaint or matter.(2A) The [F632Director General] may require that no appointment is made under sub- paragraph (2) unless [F638the Director General] has given notice to the appropriate authority that [F638the Director General] approves the person whom that authority proposes to appoint.(2B) Where at any time the [F632Director General] is not satisfied with the person investigating, the [F632Director General] may require the appropriate authority, as soon as reasonably practicable after being required to do so—(a) to select another person falling within sub-paragraph (2)(a) or (b) to investigate the complaint or matter, and(b) to notify the [F632Director General] of the person selected.(2C) Sub-paragraph (2B) applies whether the person investigating was appointed—(a) before the appropriate authority was given notice of the [F666Director General's] determination that [F638the Director General] should direct the investigation by the appropriate authority,(b) under sub-paragraph (2) (including where the appointment was approved by the [F632Director General] in accordance with sub-paragraph (2A)), or(c) under sub-paragraph (2D)(a).(2D) Where a selection made in pursuance of a requirement under sub-paragraph (2B) has been notified to the [F632Director General]—(a) the appropriate authority shall appoint that person to investigate the complaint or matter if, but only if, the [F632Director General] notifies the authority that [F638the Director General] approves the appointment of that person;(b) if the [F632Director General] notifies the authority that [F638the Director General] does not approve the appointment of that person, the appropriate authority must make another selection in accordance with sub- paragraph (2B).(a) 
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc. Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
199
(2E) A person appointed under this paragraph to investigate any complaint or conduct matter—(a) in the case of an investigation relating to any conduct of a chief officer, must not be a person under that chief officer's direction and control, and(b) in the case of an investigation relating to any conduct of the Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis or of the Deputy Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis, must be a person nominated by the Secretary of State for appointment under this paragraph (and approved for appointment in accordance with sub-paragraph (2A) (if required) or (2D)(a)).(2F) A person appointed under this paragraph to investigate any DSI matter—(a) in relation to which the relevant officer is a chief officer, must not be a person under that chief officer's direction and control, and(b) in relation to which the relevant officer is the Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis or the Deputy Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis, must be a person nominated by the Secretary of State for appointment under this paragraph (and approved for appointment in accordance with sub- paragraph (2A) (if required) or (2D)(a)).](3) The person appointed to investigate the complaint or matter shall, in relation to that investigation, be under the direction and control of the [F632Director General].[F755(4) The person appointed to investigate the complaint or matter shall keep the[F632Director General] informed of the progress of the investigation.]
200	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc.Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesInvestigations by the [F632Director General]F756...19 (1) This paragraph applies where the [F632Director General] has determined that [F638the Director General] should F757... carry out the investigation of a complaint [F758, recordable conduct matter or DSI matter].[F759(2) The Director General must designate both—(a) a person to take charge of the investigation, and(b) such members of the Office's staff as are required by the Director General to assist the person designated to take charge of the investigation.(2A) The person designated under sub-paragraph (2) to take charge of an investigation must be—(a) the Director General acting personally, or(b) a person who is authorised to exercise the function of taking charge of the investigation on behalf of the Director General by virtue of paragraph 6A of Schedule 2 (delegation of Director General's functions).](3) The person designated under sub-paragraph (2) to be the person to take charge of an investigation relating to any conduct of the Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis or of the Deputy Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis must be the person nominated by the Secretary of State to be so designated under that sub-paragraph.[F760(3A) The person designated under sub-paragraph (2) to be the person to take charge of an investigation of a DSI matter in relation to which the relevant officer is the Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis or the Deputy Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis must be the person nominated by the Secretary of State to be so designated under that sub-paragraph.](4) A [F761person] who—(a) is designated under sub-paragraph (2) in relation to any investigation, but(b) does not already, by virtue of section 97(8) of the 1996 Act, have all the powers and privileges of a constable throughout England and Wales and the adjacent United Kingdom waters,shall, for the purposes of the carrying out of the investigation and all purposes connected with it, have all those powers and privileges throughout England and Wales and those waters.
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc. Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
201
(5) A [F762person designated under sub-paragraph (2)] who is not a constable shall not, as a result of sub-paragraph (4), be treated as being in police service for the purposes of—(a) section 280 of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992 (c. 52) (person in police service excluded from definitions of “worker” and “employee”); or(b) section 200 of the Employment Rights Act 1996 (c. 18) (certain provisions of that Act not to apply to persons in police service).F763(6) The Secretary of State may by order [F764provide that—(a) such provisions of the 1984 Act relating to investigations of offences conducted by police officers as may be specified in the order, and(b) such provisions of a code of practice under section 60, 60A or 66 of that Act as may be so specified,shall apply.][F765(6A) An order under sub-paragraph (6) may, in particular, provide that where a provision applied by the order allows a power to be exercised only if an authorisation is given by a police officer of or above a particular rank, the authorisation may be given bya [F766the Director General or a member of the Office's staff] of or above a specified grade.](7) References in this paragraph to the powers and privileges of a constable—(a) are references to any power or privilege conferred by or under any enactment (including one passed after the passing of this Act) on a constable; andF767(aa)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .(b) shall have effect as if every such power were exercisable, and every such privilege existed, throughout England and Wales and the adjacent United Kingdom waters (whether or not that is the case apart from this sub- paragraph).(8) In this paragraph “United Kingdom waters” means the sea and other waters within the seaward limits of the United Kingdom’s territorial sea.
202	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc.Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesF761 Word in Sch. 3 para. 19(4) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 56(7)(d); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)F762 Words in Sch. 3 para. 19(5) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 56(7)(e); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)F763 Word in Sch. 3 para. 19(6) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 56(7)(f); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)F764 Words in Sch. 3 para. 19(6) substituted (1.10.2014) by Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12), ss. 136(2), 185(1) (with ss. 21, 33, 42, 58, 75, 93); S.I. 2014/2454, art. 3(a)F765 Sch. 3 para. 19(6A) inserted (1.10.2014) by Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12),ss. 136(3), 185(1) (with ss. 21, 33, 42, 58, 75, 93); S.I. 2014/2454, art. 3(a)F766 Words in Sch. 3 para. 19(6A) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 56(7)(g); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)F767 Sch. 3 para. 19(7)(aa) omitted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by virtue of Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 20; S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))Modifications etc. (not altering text)C106 Sch. 3 para. 19 applied (with modifications) (28.12.2005) by virtue of The Revenue and Customs (Complaints and Misconduct) Regulations 2005 (S.I. 2005/3311), reg. 3(4)(6), Sch. 3C107 Sch. 3 para. 19(4)(5)(7)(8) applied (with modifications) (16.1.2012) by The Elected Local Policing Bodies (Complaints and Misconduct) Regulations 2012 (S.I. 2012/62), regs. 1, 20(3) (with reg. 3(6))Commencement InformationI33  Sch. 3 para. 19 wholly in force at 1.4.2004; Sch. 3 para. 19 not in force at Royal Assent see s. 108(2); Sch. 3 para. 19 in force for specified purposes at 1.10.2002 by S.I. 2002/2306, art. 4(e); Sch. 3 para. 19 in force in so far as not already in force at 1.4.2004 by S.I. 2004/913, art. 2(d)[F768Investigations by the [F632Director General]: power to serve information notice19ZA (1) The [F632Director General] may serve upon any person an information notice requiring the person to provide [F638the Director General] with information that [F638the Director General] reasonably requires for the purposes of an investigation in accordance with paragraph 19.(2) But an information notice must not require a person—(a) to provide information that might incriminate the person;(b) to provide an item subject to legal privilege within the meaning of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 (see section 10 of that Act);(c) to make a disclosure that would be prohibited by [F769any of Parts 1 to 7 or Chapter 1 of Part 9 of the Investigatory Powers Act 2016];(a) 
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc. Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
203
(d) to provide information that was provided to the person by, or by an agency of, the government of a country or territory outside the United Kingdom where that government does not consent to the disclosure of the information.(3) Neither must an information notice require a postal or telecommunications operatorF770... to provide communications data F771....[ In	sub-paragraph	(3)	“communications	data”,	“postal	operator”	andF772(3A) “telecommunications operator” have the same meanings as in the Investigatory Powers Act 2016 (see sections 261 and 262 of that Act).](4) An information notice must—(a) specify or describe the information that is required by the [F632Director General] and the form in which it must be provided;(b) specify the period within which the information must be provided;(c) give details of the right of appeal against the information notice under paragraph 19ZC.(5) The period specified under sub-paragraph (4)(b) must not end before the end of the period within which an appeal can be brought against the notice and, if such an appeal is brought, the information need not be provided pending the determination or withdrawal of the appeal.(6) The [F632Director General] may cancel an information notice by written notice to the person on whom it was served.][F768Failure to comply with information notice19ZB (1) If a person who has received an information notice—(a) fails or refuses to provide the information required by the notice, or(b) knowingly or recklessly provides information in response to the notice that is false in a material respect,the [F632Director General] may certify in writing to the High Court that the person has failed to comply with the information notice.(2) The High Court may then inquire into the matter and, after hearing any witness who may be produced against or on behalf of the person, and after hearing any statement
204	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc.Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesoffered in defence, deal with the person as if the person had committed a contempt of court.][F768Appeals against information notices19ZC (1) A person on whom an information notice is served may appeal against the notice to the First-tier Tribunal on the ground that the notice is not in accordance with the law.(2) If the Tribunal considers that the notice is not in accordance with the law—(a) it must quash the notice, and(b) it may give directions to the [F632Director General] in relation to the service of a further information notice.][F768Sensitive information: restriction on further disclosure]F77319ZD	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .[F774Investigations by the [F632Director General]: power of seizure19ZE (1) The powers conferred by this paragraph are exercisable by a person—(a) who is designated under paragraph 19(2) in relation to an investigation (the “designated person”), and(b) who is lawfully on any premises for the purposes of the investigation.(2) The designated person may seize anything which is on the premises if the designated person has reasonable grounds for believing—(2) 
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc. Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
205
(a) that it is evidence relating to the conduct or other matter to which the investigation relates, and(b) that it is necessary to seize it in order to prevent the evidence being concealed, lost, altered or destroyed.(3) The designated person may require any information which is stored in any electronic form and is accessible from the premises to be produced in a form in which it can be taken away and in which it is visible and legible, or from which it can readily be produced in a visible and legible form, if the designated person has reasonable grounds for believing—(a) that it is evidence relating to the conduct or other matter to which the investigation relates, and(b) that it is necessary to do so in order to prevent the evidence being concealed, lost, tampered with or destroyed.(4) The powers conferred by this paragraph do not authorise the seizure of an item which the designated person exercising the power has reasonable grounds for believing to be an item subject to legal privilege within the meaning of the 1984 Act (see section 10 of that Act).(5) Where a designated person has the power to seize a thing or require information to be produced under this paragraph and under section 19 of the 1984 Act (by virtue of section 97(8) of the 1996 Act or paragraph 19(4)), the designated person is to be treated for all purposes as acting in exercise of the power conferred by section 19 of the 1984 Act.(6) In this paragraph “premises” has the same meaning as in the 1984 Act (see section 23 of that Act).Further provision about seizure under paragraph 19ZE19ZF (1) This paragraph applies where a designated person seizes anything under paragraph 19ZE(2).(2) The designated person must provide a notice in relation to the thing seized if requested to do so by a person showing himself—(a) to be the occupier of the premises on which it was seized, or(b) to have had custody or control of it immediately before the seizure.(3) The notice must state what has been seized and the reason for its seizure.(4) The notice must be provided within a reasonable time from the making of the request for it.(5) In this paragraph “designated person” has the same meaning as in paragraph 19ZE.Investigations by the [F632Director General]: power of retention19ZG (1) This paragraph applies to anything which, for the purposes of an investigation in accordance with paragraph 19—(a) has been seized under paragraph 19ZE(2) or taken away following a requirement imposed under paragraph 19ZE(3), or(b) is otherwise lawfully in the possession of the [F632Director General].(a) 
206	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc.Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(2) Anything to which this paragraph applies may be retained by the [F632Director General] for as long as is necessary in all the circumstances, including (amongst other things) so that it may be used as evidence in criminal or disciplinary proceedings or in an inquest held under Part 1 of the Coroners and Justice Act 2009.(3) For the purposes of sub-paragraph (2), the retention of anything to which this paragraph applies is not necessary if having a photograph or copy of the thing would suffice (and the [F632Director General] may arrange for the thing to be photographed or copied before it ceases to be retained).Further provision about things retained under paragraph 19ZG19ZH (1) This paragraph applies to anything which—(a) has been seized (whether under paragraph 19ZE(2) or otherwise), and(b) is being retained by the [F632Director General] under paragraph 19ZG.(2) If a request for permission to be granted access to a thing to which this paragraph applies is made to the [F632Director General] by—(a) a person who had custody or control of the thing immediately before it was seized, or(b) someone acting on behalf of such a person,the [F632Director General] must allow the person who made the request access to it under the supervision of a member of the [F775Office's] staff.(3) Sub-paragraph (4) applies if a request for a photograph or copy of a thing to which this paragraph applies is made to the [F632Director General] by—(a) a person who had custody or control of the thing immediately before it was seized, or(b) someone acting on behalf of such a person.(4) The [F632Director General] must either—(a) allow the person who made the request access to the thing under the supervision of a member of the [F776Office's] staff for the purpose of photographing or copying it, or(b) arrange for the thing to be photographed or copied.(5) If the [F632Director General] acts under sub-paragraph (4)(b), the [F632Director General] must supply the photograph or copy to the person who made the request within a reasonable time from the making of the request.(6) The [F632Director General] is not obliged to do anything in response to a request under sub-paragraph (2) or (3) if the [F632Director General] has reasonable grounds for believing that to do so would prejudice—(a) any investigation being carried out in accordance with this Schedule, or(b) any criminal or disciplinary proceedings or any inquest held under Part 1 of the Coroners and Justice Act 2009.](a) 
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc. Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
207
[F777Special procedure where investigation relates to police officer or special constable[F77819A(1) This paragraph applies to an investigation where condition A, B or C is satisfied.(2) Condition A is that—(a) the investigation is an investigation of a complaint, and(b) during the course of the investigation it appears to the person investigating [F779or, in the case of an investigation by a designated person under paragraph 19, the Director General,] that there is an indication that a member of a policeforce, or a special constable, to whose conduct the investigation relates may have committed a criminal offence or behaved in a manner which would justify the bringing of disciplinary proceedings.(3) Condition B is that—(a) the investigation is an investigation of a complaint being carried out by a person appointed under paragraph 18, and(b) during the course of the investigation the [F632Director General] determines that there is an indication that a member of a police force, or a special constable, to whose conduct the investigation relates may have committed a criminal offence or behaved in a manner which would justify the bringing of disciplinary proceedings.(4) Condition C is that—(a) the investigation is an investigation of a recordable conduct matter, and(b) the investigation relates to the conduct of a member of a police force or a special constable.(5) Where this paragraph applies to an investigation the person investigating must proceed with the investigation in accordance with regulations made by the Secretary of State under this sub-paragraph.(6) Regulations under sub-paragraph (5) may (amongst other things) make provision—(2) 
208	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc.Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(a) as to the procedure to be followed in connection with any interview of the person concerned, including provision requiring the person concerned to attend an interview;(b) requiring the person investigating to supply information to the appropriate authority.(7) In this paragraph “the person concerned”—(a) in relation to an investigation of a complaint, means the person in respect of whom it appears to the person investigating [F780or, in the case of an investigation by a designated person under paragraph 19, the Director General,] that there is the indication mentioned in sub-paragraph (2)(b) or (as the case may be) the person in respect of whom the [F632Director General] determines that there is the indication mentioned in sub-paragraph (3)(b);(b) in relation to an investigation of a recordable conduct matter, means the person to whose conduct the investigation relates.]Assessment of seriousness of conduct under investigationF77819B	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Duty to consider submissions from person whose conduct is being investigatedF77819C	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc. Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
209
Interview of person whose conduct is being investigatedF77819D	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Duty to provide certain information to appropriate authorityF77819E	][F781Interview of persons serving with the police etc during certain investigations19F	(1) This paragraph applies to an investigation of a complaint, recordable conduct matter or DSI matter which—(a) is carried out by the appropriate authority under the [F782direction] of the[F632Director General], or(b) is carried out by [F783a person designated under paragraph 19 (investigations by Director General)].(2) The Secretary of State may by regulations make provision as to the procedure to be followed in connection with an interview which—(a) is held with a serving officer during the course of the investigation by the person investigating the complaint or matter [F784other than, in the case of an investigation to which paragraph 19A applies, a serving officer who isthe person concerned in relation to the investigation (within the meaning of paragraph 19A).]F785(b)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
210	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc.Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(3) Regulations under sub-paragraph (2) may in particular make provision—(a) requiring a serving officer to attend an interview,(b) for determining how the time at which an interview is to be held is to be agreed or decided,(c) about the information that must be provided to a serving officer being interviewed,(d) for enabling a serving officer to be accompanied at the interview by a person of a prescribed description.(4) “Serving officer” means a person who—(a) is serving with the police, or(b) is serving with an additional police body.(5) A person is serving with an additional police body if the person is a member of, or is employed or otherwise engaged for the purposes of, that body (subject to sub- paragraph (6)).(6) The Secretary of State may by regulations provide, in relation to an additional police body, that a person is serving with that body only if the person—(a) is a member of, or is employed or otherwise engaged for the purposes of, that body, and(b) is of a prescribed description.(7) An “additional police body” means—(a) a body of constables which is maintained by an authority other than a local policing body and is prescribed in regulations made by the Secretary of State under this sub-paragraph, F786...(a) 
[F787(aa)
a body required by section 26BA to enter into an agreement with the[F632Director General], or]
[F788(b)	the National Crime Agency.](8) The Secretary of State must obtain the consent of the Northern Ireland Assembly before making provision in regulations under this paragraph which would be within the legislative competence of the Northern Ireland Assembly.(9) But consent under sub-paragraph (8) is not required in relation to a provision if—(a) a Bill for an Act of the Northern Ireland Assembly containing the provision would require the consent of the Secretary of State under section 8 of the Northern Ireland Act 1998, and(b) the provision does not affect, other than incidentally, a transferred matter (within the meaning of that Act).(10) Nothing in this paragraph prevents or restricts the holding of interviews to which regulations under this paragraph do not apply during the course of any investigation under this Schedule.]
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc. Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
211
Restrictions on proceedings pending the conclusion of an investigation20 (1) No criminal or disciplinary proceedings shall be brought in relation to any matter which is the subject of an investigation in accordance with the provisions of this Schedule [F789 until—[F790(a) the conduct to which the investigation relates has been certified in accordance with regulations under paragraph 20A, or]][F791(b)]  a report on that investigation has been submitted to the [F632Director General] or to the appropriate authority under paragraph 22 [F792or 24A][F793or, where under paragraph 19 the Director General has personally carried out the investigation, a report has been completed by the Director General].F794(2) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .(3) The restrictions imposed by this paragraph in relation to the bringing of criminal proceedings shall not apply to the bringing of criminal proceedings by the Director of Public Prosecutions in any case in which it appears to him that there are exceptional circumstances which make it undesirable to delay the bringing of such proceedings.
212	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc.Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes[F795Accelerated procedure in special cases[F79620A(1) This paragraph applies where—(a) at any time before the completion of an investigation of a complaint or recordable conduct matter, the person investigating [F797or, in the case of an investigation by a designated person under paragraph 19, the DirectorGeneral,] believes that the appropriate authority would, on consideration of the matter, be likely to consider that the conditions in sub-paragraph (2) are satisfied, or(b) at any time before the completion of an investigation of a complaint or recordable conduct matter being carried out by a person appointed under paragraph 18, the [F632Director General] determines that the appropriate authority would, on consideration of the matter, be likely to consider that theconditions in sub-paragraph (2) are satisfied.(2) The conditions in this sub-paragraph are that—(a) there is sufficient evidence, in the form of written statements or other documents, to establish on the balance of probabilities that conduct to which the investigation relates constitutes gross misconduct, and(b) it is in the public interest for the person whose conduct it is to cease to be a member of a police force, or to be a special constable, without delay.(3) Where this paragraph applies the person investigating, the appropriate authority and [F798(where the person investigating is not also the Director General carrying out an investigation under paragraph 19 personally)] the [F632Director General] must proceed in accordance with regulations made by the Secretary of State.(2) 
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc. Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
213
(4) Regulations under sub-paragraph (3) may (amongst other things) make provision—(a) for the person investigating to continue the investigation (whether to its full extent or to such lesser extent as is provided) or to stop investigating;(b) for the person investigating to submit a report on the investigation [F799or, where the investigation is carried out under paragraph 19 by the Director General personally, finalise one,] to a point before its completion (not being a report under paragraph 22);(c) for the conduct to which the investigation relates to be certified for the purposes of paragraph 20(1)(a).]Investigations managed or carried out by Commission: action by appropriate authorityF79620B	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Investigations managed or carried out by Commission: action by CommissionF79620C	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
214	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc.Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesInvestigations managed or carried out by Commission: action by CommissionF79620D	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Other investigations: action by appropriate authorityF79620E	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Other investigations: action by appropriate authorityF79620F	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .20G	F800. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Special cases: recommendation or direction of CommissionF79620H	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc. Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
215
Special cases: recommendation or direction of CommissionF79620I	]F801...F80121	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .[F802Procedure where conduct matter is revealed during investigation of DSI matter21A (1) If during the course of an investigation of a DSI matter it appears to a person appointed under paragraph 18 F803... that there is an indication that a person serving with the police (“the person whose conduct is in question”) may have—(a) committed a criminal offence, or(b) behaved in a manner which would justify the bringing of disciplinary proceedings,he shall make a submission to that effect to the [F632Director General].(2) If, after considering a submission under sub-paragraph (1), the [F632Director General] determines that there is such an indication, [F638the Director General] shall—(a) notify the appropriate authority in relation to the DSI matter and (if different) the appropriate authority in relation to the person whose conduct is in question of [F656the Director General's] determination; and(b) send to it (or each of them) a copy of the submission under sub-paragraph (1).(a) 
216	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc.Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes      [ If during the course of an investigation of a DSI matter being carried out by a person F804(2A) appointed under paragraph 18 the [F632Director General] determines (without there having been a submission under sub-paragraph (1)) that there is an indication thata person serving with the police (“the person whose conduct is in question”) may have—(a) committed a criminal offence, or(b) behaved in a manner which would justify the bringing of disciplinary proceedings,[F638the Director General] shall notify the appropriate authority in relation to the DSI matter and (if different) the appropriate authority in relation to the person whose conduct is in question of [F656the Director General's] determination.]     [ If during the course of an investigation of a DSI matter being carried out by a F805(2B) person designated under paragraph 19 the Director General determines that there is an indication that a person serving with the police (“the person whose conduct is inquestion”) may have—(a) committed a criminal offence, or(b) behaved in a manner which would justify the bringing of disciplinary proceedings,the Director General must proceed under sub-paragraph (2C).(2C) The Director General must—(a) prepare a record of the determination,(b) notify the appropriate authority in relation to the DSI matter and (if different) the appropriate authority in relation to the person whose conduct is in question of the determination, and(c) send to it (or each of them) a copy of the record of the determination prepared under paragraph (a).](3) If during the course of an investigation of a DSI matter it appears to a person appointed under paragraph 16 F806... that there is an indication that a person serving with the police (“the person whose conduct is in question”) may have—(a) committed a criminal offence, or(b) behaved in a manner which would justify the bringing of disciplinary proceedings,he shall make a submission to that effect to the appropriate authority in relation to the DSI matter.(4) If, after considering a submission under sub-paragraph (3), the appropriate authority determines that there is such an indication, it shall—(a) if it is not the appropriate authority in relation to the person whose conduct is in question, notify that other authority of its determination and send to that authority a copy of the submission under sub-paragraph (3); and(b) notify the [F632Director General] of its determination and send to it a copy of the submission under sub-paragraph (3).(5) Where the appropriate authority in relation to the person whose conduct is in question—(a) is notified of a determination by the [F632Director General] under sub- paragraph (2) [F807or (2A)],(a) 
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc. Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
217

[F808(aa)
is notified of a determination by the Director General under sub- paragraph (2C),]
(b) (in a case where it is also the appropriate authority in relation to the DSI matter) makes a determination under sub-paragraph (4), or(c) (in a case where it is not the appropriate authority in relation to the DSI matter) is notified by that other authority of a determination by it under sub- paragraph (4),F809 it shall record the matter under paragraph 11 as a conduct matter . . . .[ Where a DSI matter is recorded under paragraph 11 as a conduct matter by virtueF810(6) of sub-paragraph (5)—(a) the person investigating the DSI matter shall (subject to any determination made by the [F632Director General] under paragraph [F81115(5A) or (5B)]) continue the investigation as if appointed or designated to investigate the conduct matter, and(b) the other provisions of this Schedule shall apply in relation to that matter accordingly.]]Textual AmendmentsF632 Words in Sch. 3 substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 56(2) (with Sch. 9 para. 56(6)); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)F638 Words in Sch. 3 substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 56(4) (with Sch. 9 para. 56(6)); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)F656 Words in Sch. 3 substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 56(5) (with Sch. 9 para. 56(6)); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)F803 Words in Sch. 3 para. 21A(1) omitted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by virtue of Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 56(13)(a); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)F804 Sch. 3 para. 21A(2A) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 25(2); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))F805 Sch. 3 para. 21A(2B)(2C) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 56(13)(b); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)F806 Words in Sch. 3 para. 21A(3) omitted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by virtue of Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 47(h)(iv); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))F807 Words in Sch. 3 para. 21A(5)(a) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 25(3); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))F808 Sch. 3 para. 21A(5)(aa) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 56(13)(c); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)F809 Words in Sch. 3 para. 21A(5) repealed (1.12.2008) by Criminal Justice and Immigration Act 2008 (c. 4),ss. 127, 149, 153, Sch. 23 para. 11(2), Sch. 28 Pt. 8 (with s. 14(1)); S.I. 2008/2993, art. 2(1)(k)(ii)(subject to art. 3)
218	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc.Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesFinal reports on investigations: complaints, conduct matters and certain DSI matters[F81222(1) This paragraph applies on the completion of an investigation of—(a) a complaint,[F813 or](b) a conduct matter, or(c) F814. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .(2) A person appointed under paragraph 16 shall submit a report on his investigation to the appropriate authority.(3) A person appointed under paragraph F815... 18 shall—(a) submit a report on his investigation to the [F632Director General]; and(b) send a copy of that report to the appropriate authority.(4) In relation to [F816a matter that was formerly a DSI matter but has been recorded as a conduct matter in pursuance of paragraph 21A(5)], the references in sub-paragraphs(2) and (3) of this paragraph to the appropriate authority are references to—(a) the appropriate authority in relation to the DSI matter; and(b) (where different) the appropriate authority in relation to the person whose conduct is in question.[F817(5) A person designated under paragraph 19 as the person in charge of an investigation must—(a) submit a report on the investigation to the Director General, or(b) where the person in charge of the investigation is the Director General acting personally, complete a report on the investigation.](6) A person submitting [F818or, in the case of an investigation under paragraph 19 by the Director General personally, completing] a report under this paragraph shall not be prevented by any obligation of secrecy imposed by any rule of law or otherwise from including all such matters in his report as he thinks fit.[F819(6A) Where a person would contravene section 21A by submitting, or (as the case may be) sending a copy of, a report in its entirety to the appropriate authority under sub- paragraph (2) or (3)(b), the person must instead submit, or send a copy of, the report after having removed or obscured the information which by virtue of section 21A the person must not disclose.][F820(7) The Secretary of State may by regulations make provision requiring a report on an investigation [F821to which paragraph 19A applies]—(a) to include such matters as are specified in the regulations;(b) to be accompanied by such documents or other items as are so specified.(a) 
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc. Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
219
(8) A person who has submitted [F822or, in the case of an investigation under paragraph 19 by the Director General personally, completed] a report under this paragraph on an investigation [F821to which paragraph 19A applies] must supply the appropriate authority with such copies of further documents or other items in that person's possession as the authority may request [F823except so far as the person is prevented from doing so by section 21A].(9) The appropriate authority may only make a request under sub-paragraph (8) in respect of a copy of a document or other item if the authority—(a) considers that the document or item is of relevance to the investigation, and(b) requires a copy of the document or the item for either or both of the purposes mentioned in sub-paragraph (10).(10) Those purposes are—(a) complying with any obligation under regulations under section 50(3) or 51(2A) of the 1996 Act which the authority has in relation to any person to whose conduct the investigation related;(b) ensuring that any such person receives a fair hearing at any disciplinary proceedings in respect of any such conduct of his.]]
220	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc.Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesAction by the [F632Director General] in [F824relation]to an investigation report [F825under paragraph 22]23   (1) This paragraph applies where—(a) a report on an investigation carried out under the [F826direction] of the [F632Director General] is submitted to [F638the Director Genera] under sub- paragraph [F827(3)] of paragraph 22; or(b) a report on an investigation carried out by a person designated by the [F632Director General] is submitted to [F638the Director General][F828, or is otherwise completed,] under sub-paragraph [F829(5)] of that paragraph.[F830(1A) But if, following the submission [F831or completion] of such a report, the [F632Director General] determines under section 13B that the complaint or recordable conduct matter is to be re-investigated the provisions of this paragraph other than sub- paragraph (2)(a) [F832(read with sub-paragraph (2ZA))] do not apply, or cease toapply, in relation to that report.](2) On receipt of the report [F833(or on its completion by the Director General)], the[F632Director General]—(a) if it appears that the appropriate authority has not already been sent a copy of the report, shall send a copy of the report to that authority;[F834(b) shall determine whether the conditions set out in sub-paragraphs (2A) and (2B) are satisfied in respect of the report;]
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc. Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
221
(c) if [F638the Director General] determines that [F835those conditions are so satisfied], shall notify the Director of Public Prosecutions of the determination and send him a copy of the report; and(d) shall notify the appropriate authority [F836and the persons mentioned in sub-paragraph (5)] of [F656the Director General's] determination under paragraph (b) and of any action taken by [F638the Director General] under paragraph (c).[F837(2ZA) Where the [F632Director General] would contravene section 21A by sending a copy of a report in its entirety to the appropriate authority under sub-paragraph (2)(a) or to the Director of Public Prosecutions under sub-paragraph (2)(c), the [F632Director General] must instead send a copy of the report after having removed or obscured the information which by virtue of section 21A the [F632Director General] must not disclose.][F838(2A) The first condition is that the report indicates that a criminal offence may have been committed by a person [F839(if any)] to whose conduct the investigation related.(2B) The second condition is that—(a) the circumstances are such that, in the opinion of the [F632Director General], it is appropriate for the matters dealt with in the report to be considered by the Director of Public Prosecutions, or(b) any matters dealt with in the report fall within any prescribed category of matters.](3) The Director of Public Prosecutions shall notify the [F632Director General] of any decision of his to take, or not to take, action in respect of the matters dealt with in any report a copy of which has been sent to him under sub-paragraph (2)(c).F840(4) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .(5) [F841The] persons are—(a) in the case of a complaint, the complainant and every person entitled to be kept properly informed in relation to the complaint under section 21; and(b) in the case of a recordable conduct matter, every person entitled to be kept properly informed in relation to that matter under that section.[F842(5A) On receipt of the report [F843(or on its completion by the Director General)], the[F632Director General] shall also—(a) seek the views of the appropriate authority on—(i) whether any person to whose conduct the investigation related has a case to answer in respect of misconduct or gross misconduct or has no case to answer,(ii) whether or not any such person's performance is unsatisfactory, and(iii) the other matters (if any) dealt with in the report (but not on whether the conditions in sub-paragraphs (2A) and (2B) are satisfied in respect of the report),(b) having considered the views (if any) of the appropriate authority, make a determination as to—(i) the matters described in paragraph (a)(i) and (ii), and
222	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc.Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(ii) whether or not disciplinary proceedings should be brought against any person to whose conduct the investigation related and, if so, what form the disciplinary proceedings should take,(c) having considered the views (if any) of the appropriate authority and if the [F632Director General] considers it appropriate to do so, make a determination as to any matter dealt with in the report, being a determination other than one that [F638the Director General] is required to make under sub-paragraph (2)(b) or paragraph (b) of this sub-paragraph,(d) notify the appropriate authority of [F656the Director General's] determination under paragraph (b) and any determination under paragraph (c),(e) where the [F632Director General] determines that disciplinary proceedings of a form specified in the determination should be brought against a person, direct the appropriate authority to bring those proceedings, and(f) direct the appropriate authority to determine what action (if any) the appropriate authority will in its discretion take, not being action involving the bringing of disciplinary proceedings, in respect of the matters dealt with in the report and having regard to the [F666Director General's] determinationunder paragraph (b) and any determination under paragraph (c).(5B) The appropriate authority must comply with a direction given under sub- paragraph (5A)(e) and must secure that the proceedings, once brought, are proceeded with to a proper conclusion.(5C) The [F632Director General] may at any time withdraw a direction given under sub- paragraph (5A)(e); and sub-paragraph (5B) shall not impose any obligation in relation to any time after the withdrawal of the direction.(5D) The appropriate authority must keep the [F632Director General] informed of the action it takes in response to a direction given under sub-paragraph (5A)(e).(5E) The appropriate authority must comply with the direction given under sub- paragraph (5A)(f) and must notify the [F632Director General] of the determination it makes.(5F) On receipt of the report [F844(or on its completion by the Director General)], where it is a report of an investigation of a complaint, the [F632Director General] may also make a recommendation under paragraph 28ZA.]F845(6) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .F845(7) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .F845(8) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .F846(9) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .F846(10) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .F846(11) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .F846(12) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .[F847(13) In relation to a DSI matter in respect of which a determination has been made under paragraph 21A(2) [F848, (2A)][F849, (2B)] or (4), the references in this paragraph to
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc. Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
223
the appropriate authority are references to the appropriate authority in relation to the person whose conduct is in question.]Textual AmendmentsF638 Words in Sch. 3 substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 56(4) (with Sch. 9 para. 56(6)); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)F656 Words in Sch. 3 substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 56(5) (with Sch. 9 para. 56(6)); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)F666 Words in Sch. 3 substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 56(3) (with Sch. 9 para. 56(6)); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)F826 Word in Sch. 3 para. 23(1)(a) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 47(h)(viii); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))F827 Word in Sch. 3 para. 23(1)(a) substituted (1.7.2005) by Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15), ss. 160, 178, Sch. 12 para. 22(2)(a); S.I. 2005/1521, art. 3(1)(w)F828 Words in Sch. 3 para. 23(1)(b) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 56(16)(a); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)F829 Word in Sch. 3 para. 23(1)(b) substituted (1.7.2005) by Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15), ss. 160, 178, Sch. 12 para. 22(2)(b); S.I. 2005/1521, art. 3(1)(w)F830 Sch. 3 para. 23(1A) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), ss. 18(3), 183(1)(5)(e); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(f) (with art. 3(4))F831 Words in Sch. 3 para. 23(1A) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 56(16)(b); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)F832 Words in Sch. 3 para. 23(1A) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), ss. 19(3)(c)(i), 183(1)(5)(e); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(g) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))F833 Words in Sch. 3 para. 23(2) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 56(16)(c)(i); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)F834 Sch. 3 para. 23(2)(b) substituted (1.12.2008) by Criminal Justice and Immigration Act 2008 (c. 4), ss.127, 153, Sch. 23 para. 13(2)(a) (with s. 14(1)); S.I. 2008/2993, art. 2(1)(i)(i) (subject to art. 3)F835 Words in Sch. 3 para. 23(2)(c) substituted (1.12.2008) by Criminal Justice and Immigration Act 2008 (c. 4), ss. 127, 153, Sch. 23 para. 13(2)(b) (with s. 14(1)); S.I. 2008/2993, art. 2(1)(i)(i) (subject to art. 3)F836 Words in Sch. 3 para. 23(2)(d) inserted (1.12.2008) by Criminal Justice and Immigration Act 2008 (c. 4),ss. 127, 153, Sch. 23 para. 13(2)(c) (with s. 14(1)); S.I. 2008/2993, art. 2(1)(i)(i) (subject to art. 3)F837 Sch. 3 para. 23(2ZA) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), ss. 19(3)(c)(ii), 183(1)(5)(e); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(g) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))F838 Sch. 3 para. 23(2A)(2B) inserted (1.12.2008) by Criminal Justice and Immigration Act 2008 (c. 4), ss.127, 153, Sch. 23 para. 13(3) (with s. 14(1)); S.I. 2008/2993, art. 2(1)(i)(i) (subject to art. 3)F839 Words in Sch. 3 para. 23(2A) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 4 para. 8(2); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(m) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))F840 Sch. 3 para. 23(4) omitted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by virtue of Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), ss. 15(9)(a), 183(1)(5)(e); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(c) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))
224	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc.Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesF841 Word in Sch. 3 para. 23(5) substituted (1.12.2008) by Criminal Justice and Immigration Act 2008 (c. 4),ss. 127, 153, Sch. 23 para. 13(4) (with s. 14(1)); S.I. 2008/2993, art. 2(1)(i)(i) (subject to art. 3)F842 Sch. 3 para. 23(5A)-(5F) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 26(2); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))F843 Words in Sch. 3 para. 23(5A) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 56(16)(c)(ii); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)F844 Words in Sch. 3 para. 23(5F) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 56(16)(c)(iii); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)F845 Sch. 3 para. 23(6)-(8) omitted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by virtue of Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 26(3); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))F846 Sch. 3 para. 23(9)-(12) omitted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by virtue of Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), ss. 15(9)(a), 183(1)(5)(e); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(c) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))F847 Sch. 3 para. 23(13) inserted (1.7.2005) by Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15), ss. 160,178, Sch. 12 para. 22(3); S.I. 2005/1521, art. 3(1)(w)F848 Word in Sch. 3 para. 23(13) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 47(h)(ix); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))F849 Words in Sch. 3 para. 23(13) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 56(16)(c)(iv); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)Modifications etc. (not altering text)C112 Sch. 3 para. 23 applied (with modifications) (28.12.2005) by virtue of The Revenue and Customs (Complaints and Misconduct) Regulations 2005 (S.I. 2005/3311), reg. 3(4)(6), Sch. 3Commencement InformationI36  Sch. 3 para. 23 wholly in force at 1.4.2004; Sch. 3 para. 23 not in force at Royal Assent see s. 108(2); Sch. 3 para. 23 in force for specified purposes at 1.10.2002 by S.I. 2002/2306, art. 4(e); Sch. 3 para. 23 in force in so far as not already in force at 1.4.2004 by S.I. 2004/913, art. 2(d)Action by the appropriate authority in response to an investigation report [F850under paragraph 22]24	(1) This paragraph applies where—(a) a report of an investigation is submitted to the appropriate authority in accordance with paragraph [F85122(2)]; F852...F853(b)	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .(2) On receipt of the report F854..., the appropriate authority—[F855(a)	shall determine whether the conditions set out in sub-paragraphs (2A) and (2B) are satisfied in respect of the report;]
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc. Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
225
(b) if it determines that [F856those conditions are so satisfied], shall notify the Director of Public Prosecutions of the determination and send him a copy of the report[F857 and(c) shall notify the persons mentioned in sub-paragraph (5) of its determination under paragraph (a) and of any action taken by it under paragraph (b).][F858(2A) The first condition is that the report indicates that a criminal offence may have been committed by a person [F859(if any)] to whose conduct the investigation related.(2B) The second condition is that—(a) the circumstances are such that, in the opinion of the appropriate authority, it is appropriate for the matters dealt with in the report to be considered by the Director of Public Prosecutions, or(b) any matters dealt with in the report fall within any prescribed category of matters.](3) The Director of Public Prosecutions shall notify the appropriate authority of any decision of his to take, or not to take, action in respect of the matters dealt with in any report a copy of which has been sent to him under sub-paragraph (2).F860(4) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .(5) [F861The] persons are—(a) in the case of a complaint, the complainant and every person entitled to be kept properly informed in relation to the complaint under section 21; and(b) in the case of a recordable conduct matter, every person entitled to be kept properly informed in relation to that matter under that section.F862(5A) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .F862(5B) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .F862(5C) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .[F863(6) F864On receipt of the report ..., the appropriate authority shall also—(a) in accordance with regulations under section 50 or 51 of the 1996 Act, determine—(i) whether any person to whose conduct the investigation related has a case to answer in respect of misconduct or gross misconduct or has no case to answer, and[F865(ia) whether or not any such person's performance is unsatisfactory, and](ii) what action (if any) the authority is required to, or will in its discretion, take in respect of the matters dealt with in the report, and[F866(aa) if it considers it appropriate to do so, make a determination as to any matter dealt with in the report, being a determination other than one that it is required to make by sub-paragraph (2)(a) or paragraph (a) of this sub- paragraph, and][F867(b) determine what action (if any), in addition to the action mentioned in paragraph (a)(ii), the authority will in its discretion take in respect of the matters dealt with in the report.]]
226	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc.Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes[F868(6A) Where the report is a report of an investigation of a complaint and the appropriate authority is a local policing body, the appropriate authority may also, on receipt of the report, make a recommendation under paragraph 28ZA.][F869(6B) It shall be the duty of the appropriate authority—(a) to take the action which it determines under sub-paragraph (6) that it is required to, or will in its discretion, take, and(b) in a case where that action consists of or includes the bringing of disciplinary proceedings, to secure that those proceedings, once brought, are proceeded with to a proper conclusion.]F870(7) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .F870(8) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .F870(9) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .F870(10) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .[F871(11) In relation to a DSI matter in respect of which a determination has been made under paragraph 21A(2) [F872, (2A)][F873, (2B)] or (4), the references in this paragraph to the appropriate authority are references to the appropriate authority in relation to the person whose conduct is in question.]
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc. Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
227
F862 Sch. 3 para. 24(5A)-(5C) omitted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by virtue of Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 47(h)(xii); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))F863 Sch. 3 para. 24(6) substituted (1.12.2008) by Criminal Justice and Immigration Act 2008 (c. 4), ss. 127,153, Sch. 23 para. 14(6) (with s. 14(1)); S.I. 2008/2993, art. 2(1)(i)(i) (subject to art. 3)F864 Words in Sch. 3 para. 24(6) omitted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by virtue of Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 47(h)(xiii); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))F865 Sch. 3 para. 24(6)(a)(ia) inserted (22.11.2012) by Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13), s. 157(1), Sch. 14 para. 14(3); S.I. 2012/2892, art. 2(g) (with art. 6)F866 Sch. 3 para. 24(6)(aa) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 27(2)(a); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))F867 Sch. 3 para. 24(6)(b) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 27(2)(b); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))F868 Sch. 3 para. 24(6A) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 27(3); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))F869 Sch. 3 para. 24(6B) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), ss. 15(10)(a), 183(1)(5)(e); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(c) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))F870 Sch. 3 para. 24(7)-(10) omitted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by virtue of Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), ss. 15(9)(b), 183(1)(5)(e); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(c) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))F871 Sch. 3 para. 24(11) inserted (1.7.2005) by Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15), ss. 160,178, Sch. 12 para. 23(3); S.I. 2005/1521, art. 3(1)(w)F872 Word in Sch. 3 para. 24(11) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 47(h)(xiv); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))F873 Word in Sch. 3 para. 24(11) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 56(17); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)Modifications etc. (not altering text)C113 Sch. 3 para. 24 applied (with modifications) (28.12.2005) by virtue of The Revenue and Customs (Complaints and Misconduct) Regulations 2005 (S.I. 2005/3311), reg. 3(4)(6), Sch. 3Commencement InformationI37  Sch. 3 para. 24 wholly in force at 1.4.2004; Sch. 3 para. 24 not in force at Royal Assent see s. 108(2); Sch. 3 para. 24 in force for specified purposes at 1.10.2002 by S.I. 2002/2306, art. 4(e); Sch. 3 para. 24 in force in so far as not already in force at 1.4.2004 by S.I. 2004/913, art. 2(d)[F874Final reports on investigations: other DSI matters
228	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc.Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes24A (1) This paragraph applies on the completion of an investigation of a DSI matter in respect of which neither the [F632Director General] nor the appropriate authority has made a determination under paragraph 21A(2) [F875, (2A)][F876, (2B)] or (4).(2) [F877The person investigating] shall—(a) submit a report on the investigation to the [F632Director General]; and(b) send a copy of that report to the appropriate authority.[ Sub-paragraph (2)(a) does not apply where the person investigating is the DirectorF878(2A) General carrying out an investigation personally under paragraph 19, but the Director General must complete a report on the investigation.](3) A person submitting a report [F879to the [F632Director General]] under [F880sub- paragraph (2) or completing one under sub-paragraph (2A)] shall not be prevented by any obligation of secrecy imposed by any rule of law or otherwise from including all such matters in his report as he thinks fit.      [ Where a person would contravene section 21A by sending a copy of a report in F881(3A) its entirety to the appropriate authority under sub-paragraph (2)(b), the person must instead send a copy of the report after having removed or obscured the informationwhich by virtue of section 21A the person must not disclose.](4) On receipt of the report [F882(or on its completion by the Director General)], the [F632Director General] shall determine whether the report indicates that a person serving with the police may have—(a) committed a criminal offence, or(b) behaved in a manner which would justify the bringing of disciplinary proceedings.    [ On receipt of the report [F884(or on its completion by the Director General)], the F883(5) [F632Director General] shall also, if [F638the Director General] considers it appropriate to do so, make a determination as to any matter dealt with in the report, being a determination other than one that [F638the Director General] is required to make undersub-paragraph (4) or that the appropriate authority may be required to make by virtue of paragraph 24C(3).]    [ But sub-paragraphs (4) and (5) and paragraphs 24B and 24C do not apply, or cease F885(6) to apply, in relation to a report submitted under sub-paragraph (2) [F886or completed under sub-paragraph (2A)] if, following the submission [F887or completion] of the report, the [F632Director General] determines under section 13B that the DSI matteris to be re-investigated.]
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc. Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
229
F875 Word in Sch. 3 para. 24A(1) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 47(h)(xv); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))F876 Word in Sch. 3 para. 24A(1) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 56(18)(a); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)F877 Words in Sch. 3 para. 24A(2) substituted (1.12.2008) by Criminal Justice and Immigration Act 2008 (c. 4), ss. 127, 153, Sch. 23 para. 15 (with s. 14(1)); S.I. 2008/2993, art. 2(1)(i)(i) (subject to art. 3)F878 Sch. 3 para. 24A(2A) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 56(18)(b); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)F879 Words in Sch. 3 para. 24A(3) inserted (1.10.2014) by Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12), s. 185(1), Sch. 11 para. 95(7) (with ss. 21, 33, 42, 58, 75, 93); S.I. 2014/2454, art. 3(c)(iii)F880 Words in Sch. 3 para. 24A(3) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 56(18)(c); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)F881 Sch. 3 para. 24A(3A) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), ss. 19(3)(d), 183(1)(5)(e); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(g) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))F882 Words in Sch. 3 para. 24A(4) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 56(18)(d); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)F883 Sch. 3 para. 24A(5) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 28; S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))F884 Words in Sch. 3 para. 24A(5) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 56(18)(e); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)F885 Sch. 3 para. 24A(6) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), ss. 18(4), 183(1)(5)(e); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(f) (with art. 3(4))F886 Words in Sch. 3 para. 24A(6) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 56(18)(f)(i); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)F887 Words in Sch. 3 para. 24A(6) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 56(18)(f)(ii); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)Action by the [F632Director General] in [F888relation]to an investigation report under paragraph 24A24B	(1) If the [F632Director General] determines under paragraph 24A(4) that the report indicates that a person serving with the police may have—(a) committed a criminal offence, or(b) behaved in a manner which would justify the bringing of disciplinary proceedings,(a) 
230	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc.Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes[F638the Director General] shall notify the appropriate authority in relation to the person whose conduct is in question of [F656the Director General's] determination and, if it appears that that authority has not already been sent a copy of the report, send a copy of the report to that authority.      [ Sub-paragraph (3A) of paragraph 24A applies for the purposes of sub-paragraph (1)F889(1A) of this paragraph as it applies for the purposes of sub-paragraph (2)(b) of that paragraph.](2) Where the appropriate authority in relation to the person whose conduct is in question is notified of a determination by the [F632Director General] under sub-paragraph (1), it shall record the matter under paragraph 11 as a conduct matter F890. . . .[ Where a DSI matter is recorded under paragraph 11 as a conduct matter by virtueF891(3) of sub-paragraph (2)—(a) the person investigating the DSI matter shall (subject to any determination made by the [F632Director General] under paragraph [F89215(5A) or (5B)]) investigate the conduct matter as if appointed or designated to do so, and(b) the other provisions of this Schedule shall apply in relation to that matter accordingly.]24C (1) [F893This paragraph applies where] the [F632Director General] determines under paragraph 24A(4) that there is no indication in the report that a person serving with the police may have—(a) committed a criminal offence, or(b) behaved in a manner which would justify the bringing of disciplinary proceedings,F894...F895(2) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc. Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
231
[ The [F632Director General] may notify the appropriate authority that it must, inF896(3) accordance with regulations under section 50 or 51 of the 1996 Act, determine—(a) whether or not the performance of a person serving with the police is unsatisfactory, and(b) what action (if any) the authority will take in respect of any such person's performance.][ On receipt of a notification under sub-paragraph (3) the appropriate authority shallF896(4) make those determinations and submit a memorandum to the [F632Director General] setting out the determinations the authority has made.][ On receipt of a memorandum under sub-paragraph (4), the [F632Director General]F896(5) shall—(a) consider the memorandum and whether the appropriate authority has made the determinations under sub-paragraph (4) that the [F632Director General] considers appropriate;(b) determine whether or not to make recommendations under paragraph 27;(c) make such recommendations (if any) under that paragraph as [F638the Director General] thinks fit.]][F897Reviews]F898... with respect to an investigation25	(1) This paragraph applies where a complaint has been subjected to—   (a) an investigation by the appropriate authority on its own behalf; F899... F900(b)	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   (a) 
232	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc.Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes[F901(1A) But this paragraph does not apply where the person investigating submitted a report on the investigation under provision made by virtue of paragraph 20A(4)(b) and did not (as a result of provision made by virtue of paragraph 20A(4)(a)) submit a further report under paragraph 22(2).(1B) Where this paragraph applies, the complainant has the right to apply to the relevant review body for a review of the outcome of the complaint.(1C) The relevant review body must notify the following of an application for a review under sub-paragraph (1B)—(a) the appropriate authority,(b) every person entitled to be kept properly informed in relation to the complaint under section 21, and(c) the person complained against (if any).]F902(2) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .F902(2ZA) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .F902(2A) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .F902(3) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .[F903(4) Where the relevant review body so requires on the making of an application for a review under sub-paragraph (1B), the appropriate authority must provide the relevant review body with—(a) a copy of the report of the investigation, and(b) such information concerning the authority's determinations under paragraph 24 as is described in a notification given by the relevant review body to the authority.][F904(4A) On a review applied for under sub-paragraph (1B), the relevant review body must determine whether the outcome of the complaint is a reasonable and proportionate outcome.(4B) In making a determination under sub-paragraph (4A), the relevant review body may review the findings of the investigation.(4C) Where the [F632Director General] is the relevant review body and the [F632Director General] finds that the outcome is not a reasonable and proportionate outcome, the [F632Director General] may—(a) make [F656the Director General's] own findings (in place of, or in addition to, findings of the investigation);(b) direct that the complaint be re-investigated;(c) make a recommendation to the appropriate authority in respect of any person serving with the police—(i) that the person has a case to answer in respect of misconduct or gross misconduct or has no case to answer in relation to the person's conduct to which the investigation related;(ii) that the person's performance is, or is not, unsatisfactory;(iii) that disciplinary proceedings of the form specified in the recommendation are brought against the person in respect of(i) 
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc. Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
233
the person's conduct, efficiency or effectiveness to which the investigation related;(iv) that any disciplinary proceedings brought against that person are modified so as to deal with such aspects of that conduct, efficiency or effectiveness as may be so specified;(d) make a recommendation under paragraph 28ZA.(4D) Where the [F632Director General] makes a recommendation under sub-paragraph (4C) (c)—(a) the appropriate authority must notify the [F632Director General] whether it accepts the recommendation and (if it does) set out in the notification the steps that it is proposing to take to give effect to it, and(b) sub-paragraphs (4) to (8) and (9)(b) of paragraph 27 apply in relation to the recommendation as if it had been made under that paragraph.(4E) Where a local policing body is the relevant review body and the local policing body finds that the outcome is not a reasonable and proportionate outcome, the local policing body may—(a) make a recommendation to the appropriate authority that the complaint be re-investigated by the authority on its own behalf;(b) where the complaint has not previously been referred to the [F632Director General] under paragraph 4, make a recommendation to the appropriate authority that it refer the complaint to the [F632Director General] under sub- paragraph (2) of that paragraph;(c) make a recommendation to the appropriate authority in respect of any person serving with the police—(i) that the person has a case to answer in respect of misconduct or gross misconduct or has no case to answer in relation to the person's conduct to which the investigation related;(ii) that the person's performance is, or is not, unsatisfactory;(iii) that disciplinary proceedings of the form specified in the recommendation are brought against the person in respect of the person's conduct, efficiency or effectiveness to which the investigation related;(iv) that any disciplinary proceedings brought against that person are modified so as to deal with such aspects of that conduct, efficiency or effectiveness as may be so specified;(d) make a recommendation under paragraph 28ZA.(4F) Sub-paragraph (4G) applies where, on a review applied for under sub- paragraph (1B), the relevant review body determines that the report of the investigation indicates that a criminal offence may have been committed by a person (if any) to whose conduct the investigation related and that—(a) the circumstances are such that, in the opinion of the relevant review body, it is appropriate for the matters dealt with in the report to be considered by the Director of Public Prosecutions, or(b) any matters dealt with in the report fall within any category of matters prescribed for the purposes of paragraph 24(2B)(b).(4G) Where this sub-paragraph applies—
234	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc.Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(a) if the [F632Director General] is the relevant review body, the [F632Director General] must notify the Director of Public Prosecutions of the determination under sub-paragraph (4F) and send the Director a copy of the report;(b) if a local policing body is the relevant review body, the local policing body must make a recommendation to the appropriate authority that the appropriate authority—(i) notify the Director of Public Prosecutions of the determination under sub-paragraph (4F), and(ii) send the Director a copy of the report.(4H) The Secretary of State may by regulations make further provision about recommendations under sub-paragraph (4E)(a), (b) or (c) or (4G)(b).(4I) The regulations may (amongst other things) authorise the local policing body making the recommendation to require a response to the recommendation.(4J) Where this paragraph applies because the person investigating submitted a report on the investigation under provision made by virtue of paragraph 20A(4)(b) (“the first report”) and a further report under paragraph 22(2), the references in sub-paragraphs (4B) and (4C)(a) to the findings of the investigation do not include a reference to findings on the first report.]F905(5) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .F905(6) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .F905(7) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .F905(8) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .F905(9) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .F905(9ZA) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .F905(9ZB) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .F905(9ZC) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .F905(9A) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .(10) The [F906relevant [F907review] body] shall give notification of [F908the outcome of a review] under this paragraph [F909and of its reasons for the determination made under sub-paragraph (4A)]—(a) to the appropriate authority F910...,(b) to the complainant;(c) to every person entitled to be kept properly informed in relation to the complaint under section 21; and(d) except in a case where it appears to the [F911relevant [F912review] body] that to do so might prejudice any F913... re-investigation of the complaint, to the person complained against [F914(if any)].F915(11) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc. Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
235
(12) It shall be the duty of the appropriate authority to comply with any directions given to it under this paragraph.(13) The Secretary of State may by regulations make provision—(a) for the form and manner in which [F916applications under sub-paragraph (1B) are to be made];(b) for the period within which any such [F917application must be made]; and[F918(c)	for the procedure to be followed by the relevant review body when carrying out a review applied for under sub-paragraph (1B).][F919(14) In this paragraph references in relation to an investigation to the outcome of the complaint do not include the outcome of any criminal or disciplinary proceedings brought in relation to any matter which was the subject of the investigation.]Textual AmendmentsF632 Words in Sch. 3 substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 56(2) (with Sch. 9 para. 56(6)); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)F656 Words in Sch. 3 substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 56(5) (with Sch. 9 para. 56(6)); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)F899 Word in Sch. 3 para. 25(1)(a) omitted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by virtue of Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 47(h)(xvii); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))F900 Sch. 3 para. 25(1)(b) omitted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by virtue of Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 47(h)(xvii); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))F901 Sch. 3 para. 25(1A)-(1C) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 34(2); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))F902 Sch. 3 para. 25(2)-(3) omitted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by virtue of Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 34(3); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))F903 Sch. 3 para. 25(4) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 34(4); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))F904 Sch. 3 para. 25(4A)-(4J) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 34(5); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))F905 Sch. 3 para. 25(5)-(9A) omitted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by virtue of Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 34(6); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))F906 Words in Sch. 3 para. 25(10) substituted (22.11.2012) by Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13), s. 157(1), Sch. 14 para. 20(12)(a); S.I. 2012/2892, art. 2(g) (with art. 6)F907 Word in Sch. 3 para. 25(10) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 34(7)(a)(i); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))F908 Words in Sch. 3 para. 25(10) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 34(7)(a)(ii); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))
236	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc.Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesF909 Words in Sch. 3 para. 25(10) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 34(7)(a)(iii); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))F910 Words in Sch. 3 para. 25(10)(a) omitted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by virtue of Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 34(7)(b);S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))F911 Words in Sch. 3 para. 25(10)(d) substituted (22.11.2012) by Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13), s. 157(1), Sch. 14 para. 20(12)(c); S.I. 2012/2892, art. 2(g) (with art. 6)F912 Word in Sch. 3 para. 25(10)(d) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 34(7)(c)(i); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))F913 Words in Sch. 3 para. 25(10)(d) omitted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by virtue of Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 34(7)(c) (ii); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))F914 Words in Sch. 3 para. 25(10)(d) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 4 para. 8(4); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(m) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))F915 Sch. 3 para. 25(11) omitted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by virtue of Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 34(8); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))F916 Words in Sch. 3 para. 25(13)(a) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 34(9)(a); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))F917 Words in Sch. 3 para. 25(13)(b) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 34(9)(b); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))F918 Sch. 3 para. 25(13)(c) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 34(9)(c); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))F919 Sch. 3 para. 25(14) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 34(10); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))Modifications etc. (not altering text)C114 Sch. 3 para. 25 applied (with modifications) (1.4.2006) by The Revenue and Customs (Complaints and Misconduct) Regulations 2005 (S.I. 2005/3311), reg. 3(5)(6), Sch. 3Commencement InformationI38  Sch. 3 para. 25 wholly in force at 1.4.2004; Sch. 3 para. 25 not in force at Royal Assent see s. 108(2); Sch. 3 para. 25 in force for specified purposes at 1.10.2002 by S.I. 2002/2306, art. 4(e); Sch. 3 para. 25 in force in so far as not already in force at 1.4.2004 by S.I. 2004/913, art. 2(d)[F920Information for complainant about disciplinary recommendations
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc. Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
237
25A (1) This paragraph applies where, on the review of the outcome of a complaint under paragraph 25, the [F632Director General] makes a recommendation under sub- paragraph (4C)(c) of that paragraph.(2) Where the appropriate authority notifies the [F632Director General] under paragraph 25(4D)(a) that the recommendation has been accepted, the [F632Director General] must notify the complainant and every person entitled to be kept properly informedin relation to the complaint under section 21 of that fact and of the steps that have been, or are to be taken, by the appropriate authority to give effect to it.(3) Where the appropriate authority—(a) notifies the [F632Director General] under paragraph 25(4D)(a) that it does not (either in whole or in part) accept the recommendation, or(b) fails to take steps to give full effect to the recommendation,the [F632Director General] must determine what, if any, further steps to take under paragraph 27 as applied by paragraph 25(4D)(b).(4) The [F632Director General] must notify the complainant and every person entitled to be kept properly informed in relation to the complaint under section 21—(a) of any determination under sub-paragraph (3) not to take further steps, and(b) where the [F632Director General] determines under that sub-paragraph that [F638the Director General] will take further steps, of the outcome of the taking of those steps.][F921Re-investigations following a review]26 F922(1) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .(2) Where the [F632Director General] directs under paragraph 25 F923... that a complaint be re-investigated, [F638the Director General] shall make a determination of the form that the re-investigation should take.(3) Sub-paragraphs [F924(4)] to (7) of paragraph 15 shall apply in relation to a determination under sub-paragraph (2) as they apply in the case of a determination under that paragraph.(2) 
238	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc.Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes[F925(3A) Where, following a recommendation under paragraph 25(4E)(a) in relation to a complaint, the appropriate authority determines that it is appropriate for it to re- investigate the complaint on its own behalf, sub-paragraphs (3) to (5) of paragraph 16 shall apply in relation to the re-investigation as they apply in relation to an investigation to which paragraph 16 applies.](4) The other provisions of this Schedule (including this paragraph) shall apply in relation to any re-investigation in pursuance of a direction under paragraph [F92625(4C)(b)]F927... [F928and any re-investigation of the type described in sub- paragraph (3A) of this paragraph] as they apply in relation to any investigation inpursuance of a determination under paragraph 15.[F929(4A) Where the [F632Director General] determines under sub-paragraph (2) that the re- investigation should take the form of an investigation by the appropriate authority on its own behalf, the [F632Director General] may also give the appropriate authority such directions as to the handling of the matter in future as the [F632Director General] thinks fit.][F930(5) The [F632Director General] shall notify the appropriate authority of any determination that [F638the Director General] makes under this paragraph and of [F656the Director General's] reasons for making the determination.(5A) The [F632Director General] shall also notify the following of any determination that [F638the Director General] makes under this paragraph and of [F656the Director General's] reasons for making the determination—(a) the complainant;(b) every person entitled to be kept properly informed in relation to the complaint under section 21;(c) the person complained against (if any).(5B) The duty imposed by sub-paragraph (5A) on the [F632Director General] shall have effect subject to such exceptions as may be provided for by regulations made by the Secretary of State.(5C) Subsections (6) to (8) of section 20 apply for the purposes of sub-paragraph (5B) as they apply for the purposes of that section.]F931(6) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc. Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
239
F922 Sch. 3 para. 26(1) omitted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by virtue of Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 37(2); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))F923 Words in Sch. 3 para. 26(2) omitted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by virtue of Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 37(3); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))F924 Word in Sch. 3 para. 26(3) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 37(4); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))F925 Sch. 3 para. 26(3A) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 37(5); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))F926 Word in Sch. 3 para. 26(4) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 37(6)(a); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))F927 Words in Sch. 3 para. 26(4) omitted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by virtue of Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 37(6)(b); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))F928 Words in Sch. 3 para. 26(4) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 37(6)(c); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))F929 Sch. 3 para. 26(4A) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 37(7); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))F930 Sch. 3 para. 26(5)-(5C) substituted for Sch. 3para. 26(5) (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 37(8);S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))F931 Sch. 3 para. 26(6) omitted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by virtue of Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 37(9); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))Modifications etc. (not altering text)C115 Sch. 3 para. 26 applied (with modifications) (1.4.2006) by The Revenue and Customs (Complaints and Misconduct) Regulations 2005 (S.I. 2005/3311), reg. 3(5)(6), Sch. 3Commencement InformationI39  Sch. 3 para. 26 wholly in force at 1.4.2004; Sch. 3 para. 26 not in force at Royal Assent see s. 108(2); Sch. 3 para. 26 in force for specified purposes at 1.10.2002 by S.I. 2002/2306, art. 4(e); Sch. 3 para. 26 in force in so far as not already in force at 1.4.2004 by S.I. 2004/913, art. 2(d)Duties with respect to disciplinary proceedings [F932etc]27	(1) This paragraph applies where, in the case of any investigation, the appropriate authority—F933(a)	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .F934(b)	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
240	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc.Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes[F935(c)	has submitted, or is required to submit, a memorandum to the [F632Director General] under paragraph 24C(4).][F936(1A) But where this paragraph would otherwise apply by virtue of sub-paragraph (1)(c), it does not apply, or ceases to apply, in relation to the investigation if the [F632Director General] determines under section 13B that the DSI matter is to be re-investigated.](2) Subject to paragraph 20 and to any recommendations or directions under the following provisions of this paragraph, it shall be the duty of the appropriate authority—(a) to take the action F937... which is or is required to be set out in the memorandum; and(b) in a case where that action consists of or includes the bringing of disciplinary proceedings, to secure that those proceedings, once brought, are proceeded with to a proper conclusion.F938(3) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .[F939(3A) Where this paragraph applies by virtue of sub-paragraph (1)(c), the [F632Director General] may make a recommendation to the appropriate authority—(a) that the performance of a person serving with the police is, or is not, satisfactory;(b) that action of the form specified in the recommendation is taken in respect of the person's performance;and it shall be the duty of the appropriate authority to notify the [F632Director General] whether it accepts the recommendation and (if it does) to set out in the notification the steps that it is proposing to take to give effect to it.](4) If, after the [F632Director General] has made a recommendation under this paragraph, the appropriate authority does not take steps to secure that full effect is given to the recommendation—(a) the [F632Director General] may direct the appropriate authority to take steps for that purpose; and(b) it shall be the duty of the appropriate authority to comply with the direction.(5) A direction under sub-paragraph (4) may, to such extent as the [F632Director General] thinks fit, set out the steps to be taken by the appropriate authority in order to give effect to the recommendation.(6) Where the [F632Director General] gives the appropriate authority a direction under this paragraph, [F638the Director General] shall supply the appropriate authority with a statement of its reasons for doing so.(7) Where disciplinary [F940or other] proceedings have been brought in accordance with a recommendation or direction under this paragraph, it shall be the duty of the authority to ensure that they are proceeded with to a proper conclusion.(8) The [F632Director General] may at any time withdraw a direction given under this paragraph; and sub-paragraph (7) shall not impose any obligation in relation to any time after the withdrawal of the direction.(9) The appropriate authority shall keep the [F632Director General] informed—(4) 
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc. Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
241
(a) in a case in which this paragraph applies by virtue of sub-paragraph [F941(1)(c)], of whatever action it takes in pursuance of its duty under sub- paragraph (2); and(b) in every case of a recommendation or direction under this paragraph, of whatever action it takes in response to that recommendation or direction.Textual AmendmentsF632 Words in Sch. 3 substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 56(2) (with Sch. 9 para. 56(6)); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)F638 Words in Sch. 3 substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 56(4) (with Sch. 9 para. 56(6)); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)F933 Sch. 3 para. 27(1)(a) omitted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by virtue of Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), ss. 15(10)(b)(i), 183(1)(5)(e); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(c) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))F934 Sch. 3 para. 27(1)(b) omitted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by virtue of Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 47(h)(xviii); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))F935 Sch. 3 para. 27(1)(c) and word inserted (1.10.2014) by Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12), ss. 138(3), 185(1) (with ss. 21, 33, 42, 58, 75, 93); S.I. 2014/2454, art. 3(a)F936 Sch. 3 para. 27(1A) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), ss. 18(5), 183(1)(5)(e); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(f) (with art. 3(4))F937 Words in Sch. 3 para. 27(2)(a) omitted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by virtue of Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), ss. 15(10)(b)(ii), 183(1)(5)(e); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(c) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))F938 Sch. 3 para. 27(3) omitted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by virtue of Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 47(h)(xviii); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))F939 Sch. 3 para. 27(3A) inserted (1.10.2014) by Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12),ss. 138(4), 185(1) (with ss. 21, 33, 42, 58, 75, 93); S.I. 2014/2454, art. 3(a)F940 Words in Sch. 3 para. 27(7) inserted (1.10.2014) by Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12), s. 185(1), Sch. 11 para. 95(9)(b) (with ss. 21, 33, 42, 58, 75, 93); S.I. 2014/2454, art. 3(c)(iii)F941 Word in Sch. 3 para. 27(9)(a) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 47(h)(xix); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))Modifications etc. (not altering text)C116 Sch. 3 para. 27 applied (with modifications) (28.12.2005) by virtue of The Revenue and Customs (Complaints and Misconduct) Regulations 2005 (S.I. 2005/3311), reg. 3(4)(6), Sch. 3Commencement InformationI40  Sch. 3 para. 27 wholly in force at 1.4.2004; Sch. 3 para. 27 not in force at Royal Assent see s. 108(2); Sch. 3 para. 27 in force for specified purposes at 1.10.2002 by S.I. 2002/2306, art. 4(e); Sch. 3 para. 27 in force in so far as not already in force at 1.4.2004 by S.I. 2004/913, art. 2(d)Information for complainant about disciplinary recommendationsF94228    . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
242	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc.Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes[F943Recommendations by the [F632Director General] or a local policing body28ZA (1) A recommendation under this paragraph (for the purposes of paragraphs 6A, 23, 24 and 25) is a recommendation of a kind described in regulations made by the Secretary of State which is made with a view to remedying the dissatisfaction expressed by the complainant concerned.(2) A recommendation of a kind described in regulations under subsection (1) may (amongst other things) be a recommendation that compensation be paid.(3) The reference in subsection (1) to the complainant concerned—(a) in relation to a recommendation made by virtue of paragraph 6A(5)(b) or (6)(c), is a reference to the complainant who applied under paragraph 6A(2) for the review;(b) in relation to a recommendation made by virtue of paragraph 23(5F) or 24(6A), is a reference to the complainant whose complaint, having been investigated, resulted in the submission [F944or completion] of the report under paragraph 22;(c) in relation to a recommendation made by virtue of paragraph 25(4C)(d) or (4E)(d), is a reference to the complainant who applied under paragraph 25(1B) for the review.(4) The Secretary of State may by regulations make further provision about recommendations under this paragraph.(5) The regulations may (amongst other things)—(a) specify the persons to whom recommendations under this paragraph may be made;(b) authorise the person making a recommendation under this paragraph (whether the [F632Director General] or a local policing body) to require a response to the recommendation;(c) require the person making a recommendation under this paragraph to send a copy of the recommendation, and any response to it, to any prescribed person or person of a prescribed description.](a) 
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc. Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
243
[F945Recommendations by the [F632Director General]28A (1) This paragraph applies where the [F632Director General] has received a report [F946(or otherwise completed one in relation to an investigation carried out under paragraph 19 by the Director General personally)] under—(a) paragraph 22(3) (report on completion of investigation of complaint or conduct matter F947... [F948directed] by [F632Director General]),(b) paragraph 22(5) (report on completion of investigation of complaint or conduct matter by [F949or on behalf of the Director General]), or(c) paragraph 24A(2) [F950or (2A)] (report on completion of investigation of DSI matter that is not also conduct matter).(2) This paragraph also applies where the [F632Director General] has made a determination on [F951a review] under—(a) paragraph [F9526A] ([F953review] relating to complaint dealt with other than by investigation), or(b) paragraph 25 ([F954review] with respect to an investigation).(3) The [F632Director General] may make a recommendation in relation to a matter dealt with in the report or [F955review].[ Where this paragraph applies—
F956(3A)(a) 
by virtue of sub-paragraph (1)(a) or (b) and the report is a report of an investigation of a complaint, or(b) by virtue of sub-paragraph (2),a recommendation made under sub-paragraph (3) may not be a recommendation of a kind described in regulations made under paragraph 28ZA(1).]
(4) A recommendation under this paragraph may be made to any person if it is made—(a) following the receipt [F957or completion] of a report relating to—(i) a DSI matter,(ii) a conduct matter of a type specified in regulations, or(iii) a complaint of a type specified in regulations; or(b) following a determination on [F958a review] relating to a complaint of a type specified in regulations.(5) In any other case, a recommendation under this paragraph may be made only to—(2) 
244	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc.Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(a) a person serving with the police, or(b) a local policing body.(6) Where the [F632Director General] makes a recommendation under this paragraph,[F638the Director General] must also—(a) publish the recommendation, and(b) send a copy of it—(i) in a case where the recommendation is made to a local policing body, to the chief officer of the police force maintained by that body;(ii) in a case where the recommendation is made to a chief officer of a police force, to the local policing body that maintains the police force;(iii) in a case where the recommendation is made to a contractor (within the meaning of section 12(10)), to the chief officer of a police force to whom the contractor is providing services, and the local policing body that maintains the police force;(iv) in a case where the recommendation is made to a sub-contractor or an employee of a contractor, to the contractor and the persons to whom a copy must be sent under paragraph (iii);(v) in a case where the recommendation is made to an employee of a sub-contractor, to the sub-contractor, the contractor and the persons to whom a copy must be sent under sub-paragraph (iii);(vi) in any other case, to any person to whom the [F632Director General] thinks a copy should be sent.(7) Nothing in this paragraph affects the power of the [F632Director General] to make recommendations or give advice under section 10(1)(e) (whether arising under this Schedule or otherwise).]
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc. Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
245
[F945Response to recommendation28B	(1) A person to whom a recommendation under paragraph 28A is made must provide to the [F632Director General] a response in writing stating—(a) what action the person has taken or proposes to take in response to the recommendation, or(b) why the person has not taken, or does not propose to take, any action in response.(2) The person must provide the response to the [F632Director General] before the end of the period of 56 days beginning with the day on which the recommendation was made, unless sub-paragraph (3) applies.(3) The [F632Director General] may extend the period of 56 days following an application received before the end of the period; and if the [F632Director General] grants an extension, the person must provide the response before the end of the extended period.(4) But if proceedings for judicial review of the [F666Director General's] decision to make a recommendation are started during the period allowed by sub-paragraph (2) or (3), that period is extended by however many days the proceedings are in progress.(5) On receiving a response, the [F632Director General] must, within the period of 21 days beginning with the day on which the [F632Director General] received it—(a) publish the response, and(b) send a copy of it to any person who was sent a copy of the recommendation under paragraph 28A(6)(b),(a) 
246	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc.Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesunless the person giving the response has made representations under sub- paragraph (6).(6) The person giving the response may, at the time of providing it to the [F632Director General], make representations to the [F632Director General] asserting that the requirements of publication and disclosure under sub-paragraph (5) should not apply to the response, or to particular parts of it.(7) On receiving such representations, the [F632Director General] may decide—(a) that the response should not be published, or that only parts of it should be published;(b) that the response should not be disclosed, or that only parts of the response should be disclosed.(8) Where, following a decision on representations, the [F632Director General] decides to publish or disclose a response (in whole or in part), [F638the Director General] must do so only after the person giving the response has been informed of the [F666Director General's] decision, and—(a) in a case where the [F632Director General] has decided to accept all of the representations, [F638the Director General] must do so within the period of 21 days beginning with the day on which [F638the Director General] received the response;(b) in a case where the [F632Director General] has decided to reject any of the representations, [F638the Director General] must do so—(i) within the period of 21 days beginning with the day on which the person was informed of the [F666Director General's] decision on the representations, but(ii) not before the end of the period of 7 days beginning with that day.(9) But if proceedings for judicial review of the [F666Director General's] decision to reject a representation are started during the period of 7 days referred to in sub- paragraph (8)(b)(ii)—(a) the [F632Director General] must not publish or disclose the response while the proceedings are in progress;(b) if the court upholds the [F666Director General's] decision to reject a representation, the [F632Director General] must publish and disclose the response (in whole or in part, as appropriate) before the end of the periodof 7 days beginning with the day on which the proceedings are no longer in progress.(10) Where a local policing body or a chief officer makes a response under this paragraph, the body or officer must, at the time the [F632Director General] publishes the response, also publish the response (to the same extent as published by the [F632Director General]) and the recommendation under paragraph 28A.(11) For the purposes of this paragraph—(a) “disclosing” a response means sending a copy of it as mentioned in sub- paragraph (5)(b);(b) the period during which judicial review proceedings are in progress includes any day on which an appeal is in progress or may be brought.](a) 
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc. Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
247
[F959(12) This paragraph does not apply, or ceases to apply, in relation to a recommendation made by virtue of paragraph 28A(1) if the [F632Director General] determines under section 13B that the complaint, recordable conduct matter or DSI matter that the[F632Director General] received a report on [F960(or otherwise completed one on in relation to an investigation carried out under paragraph 19 by the Director General personally)] is to be re-investigated.][F961Minor definitions29 In this Part of this Schedule—F962...  [F963“gross misconduct” means a breach of the Standards of Professional Behaviour that is so serious as to justify dismissal;  “misconduct” means a breach of the Standards of Professional Behaviour; “the person investigating”, in relation to a complaint, recordable conduct matter or DSI matter, means the person appointed or designated toinvestigate that complaint or matter;  “prescribed” means prescribed by regulations made by the Secretary of State;  “the Standards of Professional Behaviour” means the standards so described in, and established by, regulations made by the Secretary of State.]]  
248	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc.Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes[F964Reviews]: the relevant [F965review] body30 (1) The relevant [F966review] body in relation to [F967a review] is—(a) the [F632Director General], in a case where [F968a local policing body is the appropriate authority in relation to the relevant complaint or] the relevant complaint falls within a description of complaints specified in regulations made by the Secretary of State for the purposes of this paragraph; or[F969(b)  the local policing body which is the relevant local policing body in relation to the relevant complaint, in any other case.][F970(2) In this paragraph and paragraphs 31 and 32—  “relevant complaint”, in relation to a review, means the complaint to which the review relates;  “relevant local policing body”, in relation to a relevant complaint where a chief officer is the appropriate authority in relation to the complaint, means the local policing body for the area of the police force of which the chief officer is a member;“review” means a review applied for under paragraph 6A(2) or 25(1B).]
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc. Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
249
[F97131(1) This paragraph applies in a case where—(a) an application for a review is made to the [F632Director General], and(b) a local policing body is the relevant review body in relation to the review.(2) The [F632Director General] must—(a) forward the application to the local policing body, and(b) notify the person who applied for the review—(i) that the local policing body is the relevant review body, and(ii) the application has been forwarded.(3) The application is to be taken to have been—(a) made to the local policing body, and(b) so made at the time when it is forwarded to the local policing body.][F97232(1) This paragraph applies in a case where—(a) an application for a review is made to a local policing body, and(b) the [F632Director General] is the relevant review body in relation to the review.(2) The local policing body must—(a) forward the application to the [F632Director General], and(b) notify the person who applied for the review—(i) that the [F632Director General] is the relevant review body, and(ii) the application has been forwarded.(3) The application is to be taken to have been—(a) made to the [F632Director General], and(b) so made at the time when it is forwarded to the [F632Director General].]
250	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 3A – Whistle-blowing investigations: procedureDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesF973[F974SCHEDULE 3A	Section 29D(5)WHISTLE-BLOWING INVESTIGATIONS: PROCEDUREDesignation of persons to take part in investigation1 (1) Paragraph 19(1), (2) [F975, (2A)] and (4) to (8) of Schedule 3 (investigations under that Schedule by the [F973Director General]F976...), and any order made under paragraph 19(4) of that Schedule, apply where the [F973Director General] decides to carry outan investigation under section 29D (1) as they apply where the [F973Director General] has determined to investigate, or is required to investigate, a complaint, recordable conduct matter or DSI matter under that Schedule.(2) In the case of an investigation under section 29D(1) relating to any conduct of the Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis or the Deputy Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis, the person designated under paragraph 19(2) of Schedule 3 (as applied by sub-paragraph (1)) must be the person nominated by the Secretary of State for that purpose.Protection of anonymity2 (1) The person in charge of an investigation under section 29D(1), and any other person designated for the purposes of the investigation by virtue of paragraph 1, may not disclose the identity of the whistle-blower or information that might (whether alone or with other information) tend to reveal that identity.(2) Sub-paragraph (1) does not apply to the extent that—(2) 
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 3A – Whistle-blowing investigations: procedure Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
251
(a) the whistle-blower consents to the disclosure of his or her identity or (as the case may be) to the disclosure of information that might tend to reveal it, or(b) the disclosure is authorised by regulations made by the Secretary of State under section 29J.(3) The person in charge of an investigation under section 29D(1) must take all reasonable steps to ensure that, where the identity of the whistle-blower, or information that might tend to reveal that identity, is disclosed for the purposes of the investigation (whether with the consent of the whistle-blower or in accordance with regulations under section 29J), it is not further disclosed without the consent of the person in charge.(4) For the purpose of the duty under sub-paragraph (3), the person in charge may impose such requirements on persons to whom the identity of the whistle-blower, or information that might tend to reveal that identity, is disclosed as are specified in regulations made by the Secretary of State for the purpose of this paragraph.Powers to obtain information etc3 Paragraphs 19ZA to 19ZC of Schedule 3 apply in relation to an investigation under section 29D(1) as they apply in relation to an investigation under paragraph 19 of that Schedule.Procedure where conduct matter is revealed during investigation4 (1) If, during the course of an investigation under section 29D(1), [F977the Director General determines] that there is an indication that a person serving with the police (“the person whose conduct is in question”) may have—(a) committed a criminal offence, or(b) behaved in a manner which would justify the bringing of disciplinary proceedings,[F978the Director General must proceed under sub-paragraph (2)].[F979(2) The Director General must—(a) prepare a record of the determination,(b) notify the appropriate authority in relation to the person whose conduct is in question of the determination, and(c) send to it a copy of the record of the determination prepared under paragraph (a).](3) Where the appropriate authority in relation to the person whose conduct is in question is notified under sub-paragraph (2), it must record the matter under paragraph 11 of Schedule 3 to this Act as a conduct matter.(4) Where a matter is, in accordance with sub-paragraph (3), recorded under paragraph 11 of Schedule 3 as a conduct matter—(a) the person in charge of the investigation under section 29D(1) must (subject to any determination made by the [F973Director General] under paragraph 15(5B) of Schedule 3) continue the investigation as if appointed or designated to investigate the conduct matter, and(b) the other provisions of Schedule 3 apply in relation to that matter accordingly (subject to regulations under sub-paragraph (5)).(a) 
252	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 3A – Whistle-blowing investigations: procedureDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(5) The Secretary of State may by regulations make provision modifying Schedule 3 in relation to an investigation of a matter that, in accordance with sub-paragraph (3), is recorded under paragraph 11 of that Schedule as a conduct matter but only for the purpose of making provision for the protection of the anonymity of whistle-blowers.Procedure where DSI matter is revealed during investigation5 (1) If, during the course of an investigation under section 29D(1), [F980the Director General determines] that the matter may be a DSI matter, [F981the Director General must proceed under sub-paragraph (2)].[F982(2) The Director General must—(a) prepare a record of the determination,(b) notify the appropriate authority in relation to the DSI matter, and(c) send to it a copy of the determination prepared under paragraph (a).](3) Where the appropriate authority in relation to the DSI matter is notified under sub- paragraph (2), it must record the matter under paragraph 14A of Schedule 3 to this Act as a DSI matter.(4) Where a matter is, in accordance with sub-paragraph (3), recorded under paragraph 14A of Schedule 3 as a DSI matter—(a) the person in charge of the investigation under section 29D(1) must (subject to any determination made by the [F973Director General] under paragraph 15(5B) of Schedule 3) continue the investigation as if appointed or designated to investigate the DSI matter, and(b) the other provisions of Schedule 3 apply in relation to that matter accordingly (subject to regulations under sub-paragraph (5)).(5) The Secretary of State may by regulations make provision modifying Schedule 3 in relation to an investigation that, in accordance with sub-paragraph (3), is recorded under paragraph 14A of that Schedule as a DSI matter but only for the purpose of making provision for the protection of the anonymity of whistle-blowers.(6) In this paragraph, references to the appropriate authority in relation to a DSI matter have the same meaning as in Part 2 (see section 29).(3) 
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 3A – Whistle-blowing investigations: procedure Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
253
Conclusion of investigation6 (1) When an investigation under section 29D(1) is concluded, the person in charge of the investigation must submit a report on it to the [F973Director General].[ Sub-paragraph (1) does not apply where the person in charge of the investigationF983(1A) is the Director General acting personally, but the Director General must complete a report on the investigation.](2) The [F973Director General]—(a) must send a copy of [F984a report submitted under sub-paragraph (1) or completed under sub-paragraph (1A)] to the whistle-blower, and(b) may, with the consent of the whistle-blower, send a copy of the report to the appropriate authority.(3) The Secretary of State may by regulations make provision for circumstances in which the duty under sub-paragraph (2)(a) does not apply.(4) The power conferred by sub-paragraph (3) may be exercised only to the extent that the Secretary of State considers necessary for any of the permitted non-disclosure purposes.(5) The Secretary of State may also by regulations make provision for circumstances in which (despite sub-paragraph (2)(b)) a copy of the report may be sent to the appropriate authority without the consent of the whistle-blower.(6) The power conferred by sub-paragraph (5) may be exercised only to the extent that the Secretary of State considers necessary for any of the permitted disclosure purposes.(7) Where the [F973Director General] would contravene section 21A by sending a copy of a report in its entirety to the whistle-blower or to the appropriate authority, the [F973Director General] may comply with its duty under sub-paragraph (2)(a) or (as the case may be) may exercise its power under sub-paragraph (2)(b) (or underregulations under sub-paragraph (5)) by sending instead a copy of the report after having removed or obscured the information which it is prohibited from disclosing by section 21A.(8) In this paragraph—(a) “the permitted non-disclosure purposes” has the same meaning as in section 29I;(a) 
254	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 3B – Designations under section 38Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(b) “the permitted disclosure purposes” has the same meaning as in section 29J.Power of [F973Director General] to make recommendations7 (1) On receipt of a report under paragraph 6[F985(1) or on its completion by the Director General under paragraph 6(1A)], the [F973Director General] may make a recommendation in relation to any matter dealt with in it.(2) The Secretary of State may by regulations make further provision about recommendations under this paragraph.(3) The regulations may (amongst other things)—(a) describe the kinds of recommendations that the [F973Director General] may make under this paragraph;(b) specify the persons to whom the recommendations may be made;(c) authorise the [F973Director General] to require a response to a recommendation made under this paragraph.][F986SCHEDULE 3B	Section 38(6B)(a) and (6D)DESIGNATIONS UNDER SECTION 38
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 3B – Designations under section 38 Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
255
PART 1EXCLUDED POWERS AND DUTIES OF CONSTABLES1 Any power or duty of a constable to make an arrest.2 Any power or duty of a constable to stop and search an individual or a vehicle or other thing.3 The power of a constable, under section 36(4) of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984, to perform the functions of a custody officer at a designated police station if a custody officer is not readily available to perform them.[F9873A.  The power of a constable, under section 55(6) of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984F988, to conduct an intimate search if an officer of at least the rank of inspector considers under section 55(5) of that Act that an intimate search by a suitably qualified person is not practicable.]4 Any power that is exercisable only by a constable of a particular rank.5 Any power of a constable under—(a) the Terrorism Act 2000;(b) the Terrorism Act 2006;(c) the Counter-Terrorism Act 2008;(d) the Terrorism Prevention and Investigation Measures Act 2011;(e) the Counter-Terrorism and Security Act 2015.6 Any power of a constable under [F989the National Security Act 2023].7 The power of a constable to make an application on behalf of the Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis under section 19 or 21 of the Investigatory Powers Act 2016 (applications for warrants under Chapter 1 of Part 2 of that Act).PART 2APPLICATION OF LEGISLATION8 (1) Where a power or duty of a constable is conferred or imposed on a person designated under section 38—(a) a reference to a constable (however expressed) in legislation relating to the power or duty includes a reference to the person designated under section 38;(a) 
256	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 3C – Designations under section 38: additional powers and dutiesDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(b) a reference in legislation to anything done in the exercise or purported exercise of the power, or in the performance or purported performance of the duty, includes a reference to anything done in the exercise or purported exercise of the power, or the performance or purported performance of the duty, by the person designated under section 38.(2) The Secretary of State may by regulations make provision for legislation relating to a power or duty of a constable specified in the regulations to apply in relation to a person designated under section 38 in a way that modifies or supplements the effect of sub-paragraph (1).(3) In this paragraph, “legislation” means any provision of—(a) an Act;(b) subordinate legislation within the meaning of the Interpretation Act 1978;(c) a Measure or Act of the National Assembly for Wales or an instrument made under a Measure or Act of that Assembly.][F990SCHEDULE 3C	Section 38(6B)(b)DESIGNATIONS UNDER SECTION 38: ADDITIONAL POWERS AND DUTIESIntroduction1 (1) The designation of a person under section 38 as a community support officer or a community support volunteer may provide for any of paragraphs 2 to 11 to apply to the community support officer or the community support volunteer.(2) The designation may provide for any such paragraph to apply—(a) to its full extent, or(b) only in cases or circumstances described in the designation.(3) Where the designation provides for any of those paragraphs to apply—(a) the community support officer or community support volunteer has any power or duty described in the paragraph as a power or duty of a community support officer or community support volunteer (subject to provision included in the designation under sub-paragraph (2)(b) or section 38(7A)), and(b) any provision made by the paragraph in connection with the exercise of the power or the performance of the duty applies in relation to the exercise of the power or the performance of the duty by the community support officer or community support volunteer.(4) In this Schedule—(2) 
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 3C – Designations under section 38: additional powers and duties Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
257
  “CSO” means a person designated by a chief officer of police as a community support officer under section 38;  “CSV” means a person designated by a chief officer of police as a community support volunteer under section 38;  “the relevant police area”, in relation to a CSO or CSV, means the police area for which the police force in question is maintained.(5) Expressions used in this Schedule and in the 1984 Act have the same meanings in this Schedule as in that Act.Powers to issue fixed penalty notices2 (1) A CSO or CSV has the power of an authorised officer of a litter authority to give a notice under section 88 of the Environmental Protection Act 1990 (fixed penalty notices in respect of litter) in relation to an individual whom the CSO or CSV has reason to believe has committed an offence under section 87 of that Act at a place within the relevant police area.(2) A CSO or CSV has the power of an authorised officer of a local authority to give a notice under section 43(1) of the Anti-social Behaviour Act 2003 (penalty notices in respect of graffiti or fly-posting) in relation to an individual whom the CSO or CSV has reason to believe has committed an offence that is a relevant offence for the purposes of section 43(1) at a place within the relevant police area.(3) A CSO or CSV designated under section 38 by the Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis has the power of an authorised officer of a borough council to give a notice under section 15 of the London Local Authorities Act 2004 in relation to an individual whom the CSO or CSV has reason to believe has committed an offence under section 38(1) of the London Local Authorities Act 1990.(4) A CSO or CSV designated under section 38 by the Commissioner of Police for the City of London has the power of an authorised officer of a borough council to give a notice under section 15 of the London Local Authorities Act 2004 in relation to an individual whom the CSO or CSV has reason to believe has committed an offence under section 27(1) of the City of Westminster Act 1999 (unlicensed street trading).(5) A CSO or CSV has the power of an authorised officer of an authority to give a notice under section 237A of the Local Government Act 1972 or under section 12 of the Local Government Byelaws (Wales) Act 2012 (fixed penalty notices in relation to offences against certain byelaws) in relation to an individual whom the CSO or CSV has reason to believe has committed an offence against a listed byelaw at a place within the relevant police area.(6) A byelaw is a “listed byelaw” for the purposes of sub-paragraph (5) if, at the time the CSO or CSV gives the notice—(a) it is a byelaw to which section 237A of the Local Government Act 1972 or to which section 12 of the Local Government Byelaws (Wales) Act 2012 (fixed penalty notices in relation to offences against certain byelaws) applies, and(b) the chief officer of police for the relevant police area and the authority that made the byelaw have agreed to include it in a list of byelaws kept for the purposes of sub-paragraph (5).(a) 
258	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 3C – Designations under section 38: additional powers and dutiesDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(7) The chief officer of police for the relevant police area must publish the list of byelaws kept for the purposes of sub-paragraph (5) in such a way as to bring it to the attention of members of the public in localities where the byelaws in the list apply.(8) The list of byelaws kept for the purposes of sub-paragraph (5) may be amended from time to time by agreement between the chief officer of police and the authority, by adding byelaws to it or removing byelaws from it.(9) Where the list of byelaws is amended, the amended list must be published by the chief officer as mentioned in sub-paragraph (7).Powers to require names and addresses3 (1) A CSO or CSV may require a person to give his or her name and address if the CSO or CSV has reason to believe that—(a) the person has committed a relevant offence in the relevant police area, or(b) the person has committed a relevant licensing offence (whether or not in the relevant police area).(2) A person who fails to comply with a requirement under sub-paragraph (1) is guilty of an offence and liable on summary conviction to a fine not exceeding level 3 on the standard scale.(3) In this paragraph, “relevant offence” means any of the following offences—(a) an offence in respect of which the CSO or CSV is authorised to give a penalty notice (whether in consequence of paragraph 2 of this Schedule or in consequence of provision included in his or her designation in reliance on section 38(6B)(a));(b) an offence under section 3 or 4 of the Vagrancy Act 1824;(c) an offence committed in a specified park which by virtue of section 2 of the Parks Regulation (Amendment) Act 1926 is an offence against the Parks Regulation Act 1872;(d) an offence under section 39 of the Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014;(e) an offence under a listed byelaw;(f) an offence the commission of which appears to the CSO or CSV to have caused—(i) injury, alarm or distress to any other person, or(ii) the loss of, or any damage to, any other person's property.(4) In this paragraph, “relevant licensing offence” means an offence under any of the following provisions of the Licensing Act 2003—(a) section 141 (otherwise than by virtue of subsection (2)(c) or (3) of that section);(b) section 142;(c) section 146(1);(d) section 149(1)(a), (3)(a) or (4)(a);(e) section 150(1);(f) section 150(2) (otherwise than by virtue of subsection (3)(b) of that section);(g) section 152(1) (excluding paragraph (b)).(a) 
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 3C – Designations under section 38: additional powers and duties Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
259
(5) A byelaw is a “listed byelaw” for the purposes of sub-paragraph (3)(e) if, at the time the CSO or CSV requires a person to give his or her name and address—(a) it is a byelaw which has been made by a relevant body with authority to make byelaws for any place within the relevant police area, and(b) it is included in the list of byelaws published for the purposes of this paragraph by the chief officer of police for the relevant police area.(6) A byelaw may be included in the list of byelaws published for the purposes of this paragraph only if the chief officer of police and the relevant body which made the byelaw agree that it should be included.(7) The chief officer of police for the relevant police area must publish the list in such a way as to bring it to the attention of members of the public in localities where the byelaws in the list apply.(8) The list of byelaws published for the purposes of this paragraph may be amended from time to time by agreement between the chief officer of police and the relevant body, by adding byelaws to it or removing byelaws from it.(9) Where the list of byelaws is amended, the amended list must be published by the chief officer as mentioned in sub-paragraph (8).(10) In sub-paragraphs (5), (6) and (8), “relevant body” means—(a) in England, a county council, a district council, a London borough council or a parish council;(b) in Wales, a county council, a county borough council or a community council;(c) the Greater London Authority;(d) Transport for London;(e) an Integrated Transport Authority for an integrated transport area in England;(f) a combined authority established under section 103 of the Local Democracy, Economic Development and Construction Act 2009;(g) a body specified in regulations made by the Secretary of State.(11) Regulations under sub-paragraph (10)(g) may provide, in relation to any body specified in the regulations, that the agreement mentioned in sub-paragraph (6) or(8) is to be made between the chief officer and the Secretary of State (rather than between the chief officer and the relevant body).(12) In the case of a relevant offence that is an offence under a listed byelaw (see sub-paragraphs (3)(e) and (5)), the power to impose a requirement under sub- paragraph (1) is exercisable only in a place to which the byelaw relates.(13) In its application in relation to an offence in respect of which the CSO or CSV is authorised to give a penalty notice under section 444A of the Education Act 1996 (penalty notice in respect of failure to secure regular attendance at school of registered pupil), sub-paragraph (1)(a) of this paragraph has effect as if the words “in the relevant police area” were omitted.(14) In this paragraph, “specified park” has the same meaning as in section 162 of the Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005.(2) 
260	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 3C – Designations under section 38: additional powers and dutiesDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesPowers to search for and seize alcohol and tobacco4 (1) A CSO or CSV may search a person for alcohol or a container for alcohol if—(a) the CSO or CSV has (in consequence of provision included in his or her designation in reliance on section 38(6B)(a)) imposed a requirement on a person to surrender alcohol or a container for alcohol under section 63(2) of the Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 or under section 1 of the Confiscation of Alcohol (Young Persons) Act 1997,(b) the person has failed to comply with the requirement, and(c) the CSO or CSV reasonably believes that the person has alcohol or a container for alcohol in his or her possession.(2) A CSO or CSV may search a person for tobacco or cigarette papers where—(a) the CSO or CSV has (in consequence of provision included in his or her designation in reliance on section 38(6B)(a)) sought to seize the tobacco or cigarette papers under section 7(3) of the Children and Young Persons Act 1933 (seizure of tobacco from young persons),(b) the person from whom the CSO or CSV sought to seize the item has failed to surrender it, and(c) the CSO or CSV reasonably believes that the person has it in his or her possession.(3) The power to search under sub-paragraph (1) or (2)—(a) is to do so only to the extent that is reasonably required for the purpose of discovering whatever the CSO or CSV is searching for, and(b) does not authorise the CSO or CSV to require a person to remove any of his or her clothing in public other than an outer coat, jacket or gloves.(4) A person who without reasonable excuse fails to consent to being searched in the exercise of a power under this paragraph is guilty of an offence and is liable, on summary conviction, to a fine not exceeding level 3 on the standard scale.(5) A CSO or CSV who proposes to exercise a power to search a person under sub- paragraph (1) or (2) must inform him or her that failing without reasonable excuse to consent to being searched is an offence.(6) If the person in question fails to consent to being searched, the CSO or CSV may require him or her to give the CSO or CSV his or her name and address.(7) If on searching the person the CSO or CSV discovers what he or she is searching for, the CSO or CSV may seize it and dispose of it.Powers to seize and detain: controlled drugs5 (1) A CSO or CSV may exercise the powers conferred by sub-paragraph (2) or (3) in the relevant police area.(2) If the CSO or CSV—(a) finds a controlled drug in a person's possession (whether or not the CSO or CSV finds it in the course of searching the person in the exercise of a power or duty conferred or imposed by his or her designation under section 38), and  (b) reasonably believes that it is unlawful for the person to be in possession of it, the CSO or CSV may seize it and retain it.  (a) 
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 3C – Designations under section 38: additional powers and duties Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
261
(3) If the CSO or CSV—(a) either—(i) finds a controlled drug in a person's possession (as mentioned in sub-paragraph (2)(a)), or(ii) reasonably believes that a person is in possession of a controlled drug, and(b) reasonably believes that it is unlawful for the person to be in possession of it,the CSO or CSV may require the person to give the CSO or CSV his or her name and address.(4) If, in exercise of the power conferred by sub-paragraph (2), the CSO or CSV seizes and retains a controlled drug, the CSO or CSV must—(a) if the person from whom it was seized maintains that he or she was lawfully in possession of it, tell the person where inquiries about its recovery may be made, and(b) comply with a constable's instructions about what to do with it.(5) A person who fails to comply with a requirement imposed under sub-paragraph (3) is guilty of an offence and liable, on summary conviction, to a fine not exceeding level 3 on the standard scale.(6) In this paragraph, “controlled drug” has the same meaning as in the Misuse of Drugs Act 1971.Powers to seize and detain: psychoactive substances6 (1) A CSO or CSV may exercise the powers conferred by sub-paragraph (2) or (3) in the relevant police area.(2) If the CSO or CSV—(a) finds a psychoactive substance in a person's possession (whether or not the CSO or CSV finds it in the course of searching the person in the exercise of a power or duty conferred or imposed by his or her designation under section 38), and  (b) reasonably believes that it is unlawful for the person to be in possession of it, the CSO or CSV may seize it and retain it.(3) If the CSO or CSV—(a) either—(i) finds a psychoactive substance in a person's possession (as mentioned in sub-paragraph (2)(a)), or(ii) reasonably believes that a person is in possession of a psychoactive substance, and(b) reasonably believes that it is unlawful for the person to be in possession of it,the CSO or CSV may require the person to give the CSO or CSV his or her name and address.(4) If, in exercise of the power conferred by sub-paragraph (2), the CSO or CSV seizes and retains a psychoactive substance, the CSO or CSV must—(a) if the person from whom it was seized maintains that he or she was lawfully in possession of it—(a) 
262	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 3C – Designations under section 38: additional powers and dutiesDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(i) tell the person where inquiries about its recovery may be made, and(ii) explain the effect of sections 49 to 51 and 53 of the Psychoactive Substances Act 2016 (retention and disposal of items), and(b) comply with a constable's instructions about what to do with it.(5) Any substance seized in exercise of the power conferred by sub-paragraph (2) is to be treated for the purposes of sections 49 to 53 of the Psychoactive Substances Act 2016 as if it had been seized by a police or customs officer under section 36 of that Act.Section 50 of that Act applies in relation to any such substance as if the reference in subsection (1)(b) to the police or customs officer who seized it were a reference to the CSO or CSV who seized it.(6) A person who fails to comply with a requirement imposed under sub-paragraph (3) is guilty of an offence and liable, on summary conviction, to a fine not exceeding level 3 on the standard scale.(7) In this paragraph, “police or customs officer” and “psychoactive substance” have the same meaning as in the Psychoactive Substances Act 2016.Powers to detain pending arrival of a constable etc7 (1) A CSO or CSV may require a person to wait with the CSO or CSV, for a period not exceeding 30 minutes, for the arrival of a constable where—(a) the CSO or CSV has required the person to give his or her name and address (whether in consequence of paragraph 3, 4(6), 5(3) or 6(3) or in consequence of provision included in his or her designation in reliance on section 38(6B) (a)), and(b) either—(i) the person has failed to comply with the requirement, or(ii) the CSO or CSV has reasonable grounds for suspecting that the person has given a name or address that is false or inaccurate.(2) Sub-paragraph (1) does not apply if the requirement to give a name and address was imposed in connection with a relevant licensing offence mentioned in paragraph 3(4) (a), (c) or (f) which the CSO or CSV believes to have been committed on licensed premises (within the meaning of the Licensing Act 2003).(3) A CSO or CSV may require a person to wait with the CSO or CSV, for a period not exceeding 30 minutes, for the arrival of a constable where—(a) the CSO or CSV has reason to believe that the person is committing an offence under section 3 or 4 of the Vagrancy Act 1824,(b) the CSO or CSV requires the person to stop doing whatever gives rise to that belief, and(c) the person fails to stop as required.(4) A person who has been required under sub-paragraph (1) or (3) to wait with a CSO or CSV may, if requested to do so, elect that (instead of waiting) he or she will accompany the CSO or CSV to a police station in the relevant police area.(5) Where the person does not elect to accompany the CSO or CSV to the police station, and the constable arrives within the period of 30 minutes, the CSO or CSV is under a duty to remain with the person and the constable until the CSO or CSV has transferred control of the person to the constable.(2) 
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 3C – Designations under section 38: additional powers and duties Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
263
(6) Where the person does elect to accompany the CSO or CSV to the police station—(a) the CSO or CSV is under a duty to remain at the police station until the CSO or CSV has transferred control of the person to the custody officer there,(b) until control is transferred, the CSO or CSV is treated for all purposes as having the person in his or her lawful custody, and(c) for so long as the CSO or CSV remains at the police station or in its immediate vicinity (whether before control of the person is transferred or afterwards), the CSO or CSV is under a duty to prevent the person's escape and to assist in keeping the person under control.(7) A person who—(a) makes off while subject to a requirement under sub-paragraph (1) or (3), or(b) makes off while accompanying a CSO or CSV to a police station in accordance with an election under sub-paragraph (4),is guilty of an offence and liable, on summary conviction, to a fine not exceeding level 3 on the standard scale.Powers to search etc individuals detained under paragraph 78 (1) A CSO or CSV may exercise the powers set out in sub-paragraphs (2) and (3) in relation to a person whom the CSO or CSV has required to wait for the arrival of a constable under paragraph 7(1) or (3) (whether or not that person makes an election under paragraph 7(4)).(2) If the CSO or CSV has reasonable grounds for believing that the person may present a danger to himself or herself or to others, the CSO or CSV may search the person.(3) If the CSO or CSV has reasonable grounds for believing that the person may have concealed on him or her anything which might be used to assist in escaping from lawful custody, the CSO or CSV may search the person for that thing.(4) The power conferred by sub-paragraph (2) or (3)—(a) does not authorise a CSO or CSV to require a person to remove any of his or her clothing in public other than an outer coat, jacket or gloves;(b) does authorise a search of a person's mouth.(5) A CSO or CSV searching a person under sub-paragraph (2) may seize and retain anything that is found, if the CSO or CSV has reasonable grounds for believing that the person searched might use it to cause physical injury to himself or herself or to any other person.(6) A CSO or CSV searching a person under sub-paragraph (3) may seize and retain anything that is found, other than an item subject to legal privilege, if the CSO or CSV has reasonable grounds for believing that the person might use it to assist in escaping from lawful custody.(7) If a CSO or CSV seizes or retains anything under sub-paragraph (5) or (6), the CSO or CSV must—(a) tell the person from whom it was seized where inquiries about its recovery may be made, and(b) comply with a constable's instructions about what to do with it.(a) 
264	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 4 – Powers exercisable by contracted-out staffDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesPersons detained under paragraph 7: park trading offences9 (1) If a CSO or CSV reasonably suspects that a person required to wait for the arrival of a constable under paragraph 7(1) has committed a park trading offence, the CSO or CSV may take possession of anything of a non-perishable nature which—(a) the person has in his or her possession or under his control, and(b) the CSO or CSV reasonably believes to have been used in the commission of the offence.(2) The CSO or CSV may retain possession of the thing in question for a period not exceeding 30 minutes unless the person makes an election under paragraph 7(4), in which case the CSO or CSV may retain possession of the thing in question until he or she is able to transfer control of it to a constable.(3) In this paragraph “park trading offence” means an offence committed in a specified park which is a park trading offence for the purposes of the Royal Parks (Trading) Act 2000.(4) In sub-paragraph (3), “specified park” has the same meaning as in section 162 of the Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005.Road traffic10 A CSO or CSV has in the relevant police area the powers conferred on persons designated by regulations under section 99 of the Road Traffic Regulation Act 1984 (removal of abandoned vehicles).Power to use reasonable force11 A CSO or CSV has power to use reasonable force—(a) to prevent a person whom the CSO or CSV has required under paragraph 7(1) or (3) to wait for a constable from making off, or to keep the person under control, at any time while the person is subject to the requirement;(b) where such a person elects under paragraph 7(4) to accompany a CSO or CSV to a police station, to prevent the person from making off, or to keep the person under control, while the person is accompanying the CSO or CSV to the police station;(c) where a CSO or CSV is fulfilling a duty imposed under paragraph 7(5) or (6), to prevent the person from making off (or escaping) and to keep him or her under control;(d) where a CSO or CSV is exercising a power conferred by paragraph 8.]F991SCHEDULE 4	Section 38[F991POWERS EXERCISABLE BY CONTRACTED-OUT STAFF]
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 4 – Powers exercisable by contracted-out staff Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
265
F992PART 1COMMUNITY SUPPORT OFFICERSPowers to issue fixed penalty notices1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .1ZA	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Power to issue community protection notices1ZB	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Power to require name and address1A	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Power to detain etc.2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Powers to search individuals and to seize and retain items2A	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .General power of seizure2B	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Power to require name and address of person acting in an anti-social manner3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Power to require name and address: road traffic offences3A	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
266	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 4 – Powers exercisable by contracted-out staffDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesPower to require name and address etc: charity collectors3B	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Power to use reasonable force to detain person4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .4ZA	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .4ZB	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Power to disperse groups and remove young persons to their place of residence4A	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .4AB	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Power to disperse groups and remove young persons to their place of residence4B	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Power to remove truants and excluded pupils to designated premises etc.4C	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Alcohol consumption in restricted areas5 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Power to serve closure notice for licensed premises persistently selling to children5A	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Confiscation of alcohol6 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Confiscation of tobacco etc.7 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Search and seizure powers: alcohol and tobacco7A	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Powers to seize and detain: controlled drugs7B	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Powers to seize and detain: controlled drugs7C	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 4 – Powers exercisable by contracted-out staff Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesPark Trading offences7D	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Powers to seize and detain: psychoactive substances7E	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .7F	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Entry to save life or limb or prevent serious damage to property8 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Entry to investigate licensing offences8A	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Seizure of vehicles used to cause alarm etc.9 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Abandoned vehicles10 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Power to stop vehicle for testing11 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Power to stop cycles11A	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
267
Power to control traffic for purposes other than escorting a load of exceptional dimensions11B	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Power to control traffic for purposes of escorting a load of exceptional dimensions12 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Carrying out of road checks13 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Power to place traffic signs13A	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Cordoned areas14 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .1 
268	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 4 – Powers exercisable by contracted-out staffDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesPower to stop and search vehicles etc. in authorised areas15 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Photographing of persons arrested, detained or given fixed penalty notices15ZA	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Power to modify paragraph 1(2A)15A	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .F993PART 2INVESTIGATING OFFICERSSearch warrants16 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .16A	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .16B	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Access to excluded and special procedure material17 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Entry and search after arrest18 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Entry and search for evidence of nationality after arrest18A	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .General power of seizure19 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Access and copying in the case of things seized by constables20 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .1 
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 4 – Powers exercisable by contracted-out staff Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesArrest at a police station for another offence21 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Power to transfer persons into custody of investigating officers22 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Powers in respect of detained persons22A	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Power to require arrested person to account for certain matters23 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Extended powers of seizure24 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Persons accompanying investigating officers24A	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .PART 3DETENTION OFFICERS
269
Attendance at police station for fingerprinting25 Where a designation applies this paragraph to any person, he shall, in respect of police stations in the relevant police area, have the power of a constable under [F994Schedule 2A to the 1984 Act (fingerprinting and samples: power to require attendance at a police station) ] to require a person to attend a police station in orderto have his fingerprints taken.Non-intimate searches of detained persons26 (1) Where a designation applies this paragraph to any person, he shall have the powers of a constable under section 54 of the 1984 Act (non-intimate searches of detained persons)—(a) to carry out a search under that section of any person at a police station in the relevant police area or of any other person otherwise in police detention in that area; and(b) to seize or retain, or cause to be seized or retained, anything found on such a search.(a) 
270	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 4 – Powers exercisable by contracted-out staffDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(2) Subsections (6C) and (9) of section 54 of that Act (restrictions on power to seize personal effects and searches to be carried out by a member of the same sex) shall apply to the exercise by a person to whom this paragraph is applied of any power exercisable by virtue of this paragraph as they apply to the exercise of the power in question by a constable.Searches and examinations to ascertain identity27 Where a designation applies this paragraph to any person, he shall have the powers of a constable under section 54A of the 1984 Act (searches and examinations to ascertain identity)—(a) to carry out a search or examination at any police station in the relevant police area; and(b) to take a photograph at any such police station of an identifying mark.Searches of persons answering to live link bail[F99527A(1) Where a designation applies this paragraph to any person, that person has the powers of a constable under section 54B of the 1984 Act (searches of persons answering to live link bail)—(a) to carry out a search of any person attending a police station in the relevant police area; and(b) to seize or retain articles found on such a search.(2) Anything seized by a person under the power conferred by sub-paragraph (1) must be delivered to a constable as soon as practicable and in any case before the person from whom the thing was seized leaves the police station.]Intimate searches of detained persons28 (1) Where a designation applies this paragraph to any person, he shall have the powers of a constable by virtue of section 55(6) of the 1984 Act (intimate searches) to carry out an intimate search of a person at any police station in the relevant police area.(2) Subsection (7) of section 55 of that Act (no intimate search to be carried out by a constable of the opposite sex) shall apply to the exercise by a person to whom this paragraph applies of any power exercisable by virtue of this paragraph as it applies to the exercise of the power in question by a constable.Fingerprinting without consent29 Where a designation applies this paragraph to any person—(a) he shall have, at any police station in the relevant police area, the power of a constable under section 61 of the 1984 Act (fingerprinting) to take fingerprints without the appropriate consent; and(a) 
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 4 – Powers exercisable by contracted-out staff Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
271
(b) the requirement by virtue of subsection (7A)(a) of that section that a person must be informed by an officer that his fingerprints may be the subject of a speculative search shall be capable of being discharged, in the case of a person at such a station, by his being so informed by the person to whom this paragraph applies.Warnings about intimate samples30 Where a designation applies this paragraph to any person, the requirement by virtue of [F996section 62(5)(c)] of the 1984 Act (intimate samples) that a person must be informed by an officer that a sample taken from him may be the subject of aspeculative search shall be capable of being discharged, in the case of a person in a police station in the relevant police area, by his being so informed by the person to whom this paragraph applies.Non-intimate samples31 Where a designation applies this paragraph to any person—(a) he shall have the power of a constable under section 63 of the 1984 Act (non-intimate samples), in the case of a person in a police station in the relevant police area, to take a non-intimate sample without the appropriate consent;(b) the requirement by virtue of subsection (6) of that section (information about authorisation) that a person must be informed by an officer of the matters mentioned in that subsection shall be capable of being discharged, in the case of an authorisation in relation to a person in a police station in the relevant police area, by his being so informed by the person to whom this paragraph applies; and(c) the requirement by virtue of subsection (8B)(a) of that section that a person must be informed by an officer that a sample taken from him may be the subject of a speculative search shall be capable of being discharged, in the case of a person in such a police station, by his being so informed by the person to whom this paragraph applies.Attendance at police station for the taking of a sample32 Where a designation applies this paragraph to any person, he shall, as respects any police station in the relevant police area, have the power of a constable under [F997Schedule 2A to the 1984 Act (fingerprinting and samples: power to require attendance at a police station) ] to require a person to attend a police station in orderto have a sample taken.
272	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 4 – Powers exercisable by contracted-out staffDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesPhotographing persons in police detention33 Where a designation applies this paragraph to any person, he shall, at police stations in the relevant police area, have the power of a constable under section 64A of the 1984 Act (photographing of suspects etc.) to take a photograph of a person detained at a police station.Taking of impressions of footwear[F99833A  Where a designation applies this paragraph to any person—(a) he shall, at any police station in the relevant police area, have the powers of a constable under section 61A of the 1984 Act (impressions of footwear) to take impressions of a person's footwear without the appropriate consent; and(b) the requirement by virtue of section 61A(5)(a) of the 1984 Act that a person must be informed by an officer that an impression of his footwear may be the subject of a speculative search shall be capable of being discharged, in the case of a person at such a station, by his being so informed by the person to whom this paragraph applies.]Powers in respect of detained persons[F99933B Where a designation applies this paragraph to any person, he shall be under a duty, when in the course of his employment he is present at a police station—(a) to keep under control any person detained at the police station and for whom he is for the time being responsible;(b) to assist any officer or other designated person to keep any other person detained at the police station under control; and(c) to prevent the escape of any such person as is mentioned in paragraph (a) or (b),and for those purposes shall be entitled to use reasonable force.33C	Where a designation applies this paragraph to any person, he shall be entitled to use reasonable force when—
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 4 – Powers exercisable by contracted-out staff Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
273
(a) securing, or assisting an officer or another designated person to secure, the detention of a person detained at a police station in the relevant police area, or(b) escorting within a police station in the relevant police area, or assisting an officer or another designated person to escort within such a police station, a person detained there.][F100033D Where a designation applies this paragraph to any person, he is authorised to carry out the duty under—(a) section 55 of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 of informing a person who is to be subject to an intimate search under that section of the matters of which he is required to be informed in pursuance of subsection (3B) of that section;(b) section 55A of that Act of informing a person who is to be subject to x-ray or ultrasound (as the case may be) under that section of the matters of which he is required to be informed in pursuance of subsection (3) of that section.]PART 4ESCORT OFFICERSPower to take an arrested person to a police station34 (1) Where a designation applies this paragraph to any person—(a) the persons who, in the case of a person arrested by a constable in the relevant police area, are authorised for the purposes of [F1001subsection (1A) of section 30] of the 1984 Act (procedure on arrest of person elsewhere thanat a police station) to take the person arrested to a police station in that area shall include that person;(b) that section shall have effect in relation to the exercise by that person of the power conferred by virtue of paragraph (a) as if the references to a constable in subsections (3), (4)(a) and (10) (but not the references in subsections (5) to (9)) included references to that person; and(c) a person who is taking another person to a police station in exercise of the power conferred by virtue of paragraph (a)—(i) shall be treated for all purposes as having that person in his lawful custody;(ii) shall be under a duty [F1002to keep the person under control and] to prevent his escape; and(i) 
274	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 4 – Powers exercisable by contracted-out staffDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(iii) shall be entitled to use reasonable force to keep that person in his charge [F1003and under his control] .[F1004(d) a person who has taken another person to a police station in exercise of the power conferred by virtue of paragraph (a)—(i) shall be under a duty to remain at the police station until he has transferred control of the other person to the custody officer at the police station;(ii) until he has so transferred control of the other person, shall be treated for all purposes as having that person in his lawful custody;(iii) for so long as he is at the police station or in its immediate vicinity in compliance with, or having complied with, his duty under sub- paragraph (i), shall be under a duty to prevent the escape of the other person and to assist in keeping him under control; and(iv) shall be entitled to use reasonable force for the purpose of complying with his duty under sub-paragraph (iii).](2) Without prejudice to any [F1005application of] paragraph 26, where a person has another in his lawful custody by virtue of sub-paragraph (1) of this paragraph—(a) he shall have the same powers under subsections (6A) and (6B) of section 54 of the 1984 Act (non-intimate searches) as a constable has in the case of a person in police detention—(i) to carry out a search of the other person; and(ii) to seize or retain, or cause to be seized or retained, anything found on such a search;(b) subsections (6C) and (9) of that section (restrictions on power to seize personal effects and searches to be carried out by a member of the same sex) shall apply to the exercise by a person to whom this paragraph is applied of any power exercisable by virtue of this sub-paragraph as they apply to the exercise of the power in question by a constable.Escort of persons in police detention35 (1) Where a designation applies this paragraph to any person, that person may be authorised by the custody officer for any designated police station in the relevant police area to escort a person in police detention—(a) from that police station to another police station in that or any other police area; or(a) 
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 4 – Powers exercisable by contracted-out staff Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
275
(b) from that police station to any other place specified by the custody officer and then either back to that police station or on to another police station in that area or in another police area.(2) Where a designation applies this paragraph to any person, that person may be authorised by the custody officer for any designated police station outside the relevant police area to escort a person in police detention—(a) from that police station to a designated police station in that area; or(b) from that police station to any place in that area specified by the custody officer and either back to that police station or on to another police station (whether in that area or elsewhere).(3) A person who is escorting another in accordance with an authorisation under sub- paragraph (1) or (2)—(a) shall be treated for all purposes as having that person in his lawful custody;(b) shall be under a duty [F1006to keep the person under control and] to prevent his escape; and(c) shall be entitled to use reasonable force to keep that person in his charge[F1007and under his control] .[F1008(3A) A person who has escorted another person to a police station or other place in accordance with an authorisation under sub-paragraph (1) or (2) —(a) shall be under a duty to remain at the police station or other place until he has transferred control of the other person to a custody officer or other responsible person there;(b) until he has so transferred control of the other person, shall be treated for all purposes as having that person in his lawful custody;(c) for so long as he is at the police station or other place, or in its immediate vicinity, in compliance with, or having complied with, his duty under paragraph (a), shall be under a duty to prevent the escape of the other person and to assist in keeping him under control; and(d) shall be entitled to use reasonable force for the purpose of complying with his duty under paragraph (c).](4) Without prejudice to any [F1009application of] paragraph 26, where a person has another in his lawful custody by virtue of sub-paragraph (3) of this paragraph—(a) he shall have the same powers under subsections (6A) and (6B) of section 54 the 1984 Act (non-intimate searches) as a constable has in the case of a person in police detention—(i) to carry out a search of the other person; and(ii) to seize or retain, or cause to be seized or retained, anything found on such a search;(b) subsections (6C) and (9) of that section (restrictions on power to seize personal effects and searches to be carried out by a member of the same sex) shall apply to the exercise by a person to whom this paragraph is applied of any power exercisable by virtue of this sub-paragraph as they apply to the exercise of the power in question by a constable.(5) Section 39(2) of that Act (responsibilities of custody officer transferred to escort) shall have effect where the custody officer for any police station transfers or permits the transfer of any person to the custody of a person who by virtue of this paragraph(2) 
276	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 4 – Powers exercisable by contracted-out staffDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changeshas lawful custody outside the police station of the person transferred as it would apply if the person to whom this paragraph applies were a police officer.F1010[F1011PART 4A]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .35B	Where a designation applies this paragraph to any person, he shall be under a duty, when in the course of his employment he is present at a police station—
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 4 – Powers exercisable by contracted-out staff Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
277
(a) to keep under control any person detained at the police station and for whom he is for the time being responsible;(b) to assist any officer or other designated person to keep any other person detained at the police station under control; and(c) to prevent the escape of any such person as is mentioned in paragraph (a) or (b),and for those purposes shall be entitled to use reasonable force.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .35C   Where a designation applies this paragraph to any person, he is authorised to carry out the duty under—(a) section 55 of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 of informing a person who is to be subject to an intimate search under that section of the matters of which he is required to be informed in pursuance of subsection (3B) of that section;(b) section 55A of that Act of informing a person who is to be subject to x-ray or ultrasound (as the case may be) under that section of the matters of which he is required to be informed in pursuance of subsection (3) of that section.F991PART 5INTERPRETATION OF SCHEDULE36 (1) In this Schedule “the relevant police area”—(a) in relation to a [F1012person designated] under [F1013section 39] by the chief officer of any police force, means the police area for which that force is maintained; F1014. . .(b) F1014. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .F1015[F1016(2) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .F1015(2A) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .(3) In Parts 3 and 4 of this Schedule “a designation” means a designation under[F1017section 39].]F1018(3A) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .(4) Expressions used in this Schedule and in the 1984 Act have the same meanings in this Schedule as in that Act.
278	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 5 – Powers exercisable by accredited personsDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesSCHEDULE 5	Section 41POWERS EXERCISABLE BY ACCREDITED PERSONSPower to issue fixed penalty notices1 (1) An accredited person whose accreditation specifies that this paragraph applies to him shall have the powers specified in sub-paragraph (2) in relation to any individual who he has reason to believe has committed or is committing a relevant fixed penalty offence at a place within the relevant police area.(2) Those powers are the following powers so far as exercisable in respect of a relevant[F1019fixed penalty] offence—(a) the power of a constable in uniform to give a person a fixed penalty notice under section 54 of the Road Traffic Offenders Act 1988 (c. 53) (fixed penalty notices) in respect of an offence under section 72 of the Highway Act 1835 (c. 50) (riding on a footway) committed by cycling;[F1020(aa) the powers of a constable F1021... to give a penalty notice under Chapter 1 of Part 1 of the Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (fixed penalty notices in respect of offences of disorder) F1022. . . ;][F1023(ab) the power of a constable to give a penalty notice under section 444A of the Education Act 1996 (penalty notice in respect of failure to secure regular attendance at school of registered pupil);][F1024(ac) the power of a constable to give a penalty notice under section 105 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006 (penalty notice in respect of presence of excluded pupil in public place);](b) F1025. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .[F1026(ba) the power of an authorised officer of a local authority to give a notice under section 43(1) of the Anti-social Behaviour Act 2003 (penalty notices in respect of graffiti or fly-posting); and](c) the power of an authorised officer of a litter authority to give a notice under section 88 of the Environmental Protection Act 1990 (c. 43) (fixed penalty notices in respect of litter)F1027(d)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 5 – Powers exercisable by accredited persons Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
279
[F1028(2A) The reference to the powers mentioned in sub-paragraph (2)(aa) does not include those powers so far as they relate to an offence under the provisions in the following list—section 12 of the Licensing Act 1872, section 91 of the Criminal Justice Act 1967, section 1 of the Theft Act 1968,section 1(1) of the Criminal Damage Act 1971, section 87 of the Environmental Protection Act 1990.](3) In this paragraph “relevant fixed penalty offence”, in relation to an accredited person, means an offence which—(a) is an offence by reference to which a notice may be given to a person in exercise of any of the powers mentioned in [F1029sub-paragraph (2)(a) to (d)]; and(b) is specified or described in that person’s accreditation as an offence he has been accredited to enforce.[F1030(3A) For the purposes of paragraph (f) of section 64A(1B) of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 (photographing of suspects in relation to fixed penalty offences) “relevant fixed penalty offence”, in relation to an accredited person, includes an offence under a relevant byelaw within the meaning of paragraph 1A(4) (and, accordingly, the reference in that paragraph (f) to paragraph 1 of this Schedule includes a reference to paragraph 1A of this Schedule).][F1031(4) In its application to an offence which is an offence by reference to which a notice may be given to a person in exercise of the power mentioned in sub-paragraph (2)(ab) [F1032or (ac)] , sub-paragraph (1) shall have effect as if for the words from “who he has reason to believe” to the end there were substituted “in the relevant police area who he has reason to believe has committed or is committing a relevant fixed penalty offence”.]
280	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 5 – Powers exercisable by accredited personsDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes[F10331A(1) This paragraph applies to an accredited person whose accreditation specifies that it applies to him.(2) The accreditation may specify that, in relation to that person, the application of sub- paragraph (3) is confined to one or more only (and not all) relevant byelaws, being in each case specified in the accreditation.(3) Where that person has reason to believe that an individual has committed an offence against a relevant byelaw at a place within the relevant police area, he may exercise the power of an authorised officer of an authority to give a notice under section 237A of the Local Government Act 1972 [F1034or under section 12 of the Local GovernmentByelaws (Wales) Act 2012] (fixed penalty notices in relation to offences against certain byelaws).(4) In this paragraph “relevant byelaw”, in relation to an accredited person, means a byelaw which—(a) falls within sub-paragraph (5); and(b) is specified or described in that person's accreditation as a byelaw he has been accredited to enforce under this paragraph.(5) A byelaw falls within this sub-paragraph if—(a) it is a byelaw to which section 237A of the Local Government Act 1972 [F1035or to which section 12 of the Local Government Byelaws (Wales) Act 2012 applies] applies (fixed penalty notices in relation to offences against certain byelaws); and(b) the chief officer of the police force for the relevant police area and the authority who made the byelaw have agreed to include it in a list of byelaws for the purposes of this sub-paragraph.(6) A list under sub-paragraph (5)(b) must be published by the chief officer in such a way as to bring it to the attention of members of the public in localities where the byelaws in the list apply.(2) 
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 5 – Powers exercisable by accredited persons Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
281
(7) The list may be amended from time to time by agreement between the chief officer and the authority, by adding byelaws to it or removing byelaws from it, and the amended list shall also be published by the chief officer as mentioned in sub- paragraph (6).]Power to require giving of name and address2 (1) Where an accredited person whose accreditation specifies that this paragraph applies to him has reason to believe that another person has committed a relevant offence in the relevant police area, he may require that other person to give him his name and address.(2) A person who fails to comply with a requirement under sub-paragraph (1) is guilty of an offence and shall be liable, on summary conviction, to a fine not exceeding level 3 on the standard scale.(3) In this paragraph “relevant offence”, in relation to any accredited person, means any offence which is—(a) a relevant fixed penalty offence for the purposes of any powers exercisable by the accredited person by virtue of paragraph 1; or[F1036(aa)  an offence under section 3 or 4 of the Vagrancy Act 1824; or][F1037(aza) an offence under a relevant byelaw within the meaning of paragraph 1A(4); or](b) an offence the commission of which appears to the accredited person to have caused—(i) injury, alarm or distress to any other person; or(ii) the loss of, or any damage to, any other person’s property;but the accreditation of an accredited person may provide that an offence is not to be treated as a relevant offence by virtue of paragraph (b) unless it satisfies such other conditions as may be specified in the accreditation.[F1038(4) In its application to an offence which is an offence by reference to which a notice may be given to a person in exercise of the power mentioned in paragraph 1(2)(ab)[F1039or (ac)], sub-paragraph (1) of this paragraph shall have effect as if for the words “has committed a relevant offence in the relevant police area” there were substituted “in the relevant police area has committed a relevant offence”.]
282	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 5 – Powers exercisable by accredited personsDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesPower to require name and address of person [F1040engaging in anti-social behaviour]F1[0F4100341(1)] An accredited person whose accreditation specifies that this paragraph applies to him shall, in the relevant police area, have the powers of a constable in uniformunder section 50 to require a person whom he has reason to believe [F1042to have been engaging, or to be engaging, in anti-social behaviour] to give his name and address.[F1043(2) In sub-paragraph (1), “anti-social behaviour” has the meaning given by section 2 of the Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (ignoring subsection (2) of that section).]Power to require name and address: road traffic offences[F10443A(1) An accredited person whose accreditation specifies that this paragraph applies to him shall, in the relevant police area, have the powers of a constable—(a) under subsection (1) of section 165 of the Road Traffic Act 1988 to require a person mentioned in paragraph (c) of that subsection who he has reasonable cause to believe has committed, in the relevant police area, an offence under subsection (1) or (2) of section 35 of that Act (including that section as extended by paragraphs 8B(4) and 9(2) of this Schedule) to give his name and address; and(b) under section 169 of that Act to require a person committing an offence under section 37 of that Act (including that section as extended by paragraphs 8B(4) and 9(2) of this Schedule) to give his name and address.(2) The reference in section 169 of the Road Traffic Act 1988 to section 37 of that Act is to be taken to include a reference to that section as extended by paragraphs 8B(4) and 9(2) of this Schedule.]
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 5 – Powers exercisable by accredited persons Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
283
Alcohol consumption in designated public places4 An accredited person whose accreditation specifies that this paragraph applies to him shall, within the relevant police area, have the powers of a constable under section 12 of the Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16) (alcohol consumption in public places)—(a) to impose a requirement under subsection (2) of that section; and(b) to dispose under subsection (3) of that section of anything surrendered to him;and that section shall have effect in relation to the exercise of those powers by that person as if the references to a constable in subsections (1) and (5) were references to the accredited person.Confiscation of alcohol5 An accredited person whose accreditation specifies that this paragraph applies to him shall, within the relevant police area, have the powers of a constable under section 1 of the Confiscation of Alcohol (Young Persons) Act 1997 (c. 33) (confiscation of intoxicating liquor)—(a) to impose a requirement under subsection (1) [F1045or (1AA)] of that section; and(b) to dispose under subsection (2) of that section of anything surrendered to him;and that section shall have effect in relation to the exercise of those powers by that person as if the references to a constable in [F1046subsections (1), (1AA) and (4) (but not the reference in subsection (1AB) (removal))] were references to the accredited person.Confiscation of tobacco etc.6 (1) An accredited person whose accreditation specifies that this paragraph applies to him shall, within the relevant police area, have—(a) the power to seize anything that a constable in uniform has a duty to seize under subsection (3) of section 7 of the Children and Young Persons Act 1933 (c. 12) (seizure of tobacco etc. from young persons); and(b) the power to dispose of anything that a constable may dispose of under that subsection;(a) 
284	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 5 – Powers exercisable by accredited personsDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesand the power to dispose of anything shall be a power to dispose of it in such manner as the relevant employer of the accredited person may direct.(2) In this paragraph “relevant employer”, in relation to an accredited person, means the person with whom the chief officer of police for the relevant police area has entered into arrangements under section 40.Abandoned vehicles7 An accredited person whose accreditation specifies that this paragraph applies to him shall have all such powers in the relevant police area as are conferred on accredited persons by regulations under section 99 of the Road Traffic Regulation Act 1984 (c. 27) (removal of abandoned vehicles).Power to stop vehicle for testing8 A person whose accreditation specifies that this paragraph applies to him shall, within the relevant police area, have the power of a constable in uniform to stop a vehicle under subsection (3) of section 67 of the Road Traffic Act 1988 (c. 52) for the purposes of a test under subsection (1) of that section.Power to stop cycles[F10478A(1) Subject to sub-paragraph (2), a person whose accreditation specifies that this paragraph applies to him shall, within the relevant police area, have the power of a constable in uniform under section 163(2) of the Road Traffic Act 1988 to stop a cycle.(2) The power mentioned in sub-paragraph (1) may only be exercised by that person in relation to a person who he has reason to believe has committed an offence under section 72 of the Highway Act 1835 (riding on a footway) by cycling.]Power to control traffic for purposes other than escorting a load of exceptional dimensions[F10488B(1) A person whose accreditation specifies that this paragraph applies to him shall have, in the relevant police area—(a) the power of a constable engaged in the regulation of traffic in a road to direct a person driving or propelling a vehicle to stop the vehicle or to make it proceed in, or keep to, a particular line of traffic;(b) the power of a constable in uniform engaged in the regulation of vehicular traffic in a road to direct a person on foot to stop proceeding along or across the carriageway.(2) The purposes for which those powers may be exercised do not include the purpose mentioned in paragraph 9(1).(3) A person whose accreditation specifies that this paragraph applies to him shall also have, in the relevant police area, the power of a constable, for the purposes of a traffic(2) 
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 5 – Powers exercisable by accredited persons Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
285
survey, to direct a person driving or propelling a vehicle to stop the vehicle, to make it proceed in, or keep to, a particular line of traffic, or to proceed to a particular point on or near the road.(4) Sections 35 and 37 of the Road Traffic Act 1988 (offences of failing to comply with directions of constable engaged in regulation of traffic in a road) shall have effect in relation to the exercise of the powers mentioned in sub-paragraphs (1) and (3), for the purposes for which they may be exercised and by a person whose accreditation specifies that this paragraph applies to him, as if the references to a constable were references to him.(5) A person's accreditation may not specify that this paragraph applies to him unless it also specifies that paragraph 3A applies to him.]Power to control traffic for purposes of escorting a load of exceptional dimensions9 (1) A person whose accreditation specifies that this paragraph applies to him shall have, for the purpose of escorting a vehicle or trailer carrying a load of exceptional dimensions either to or from the relevant police area, the power of a constable engaged in the regulation of traffic in a road—(a) to direct a vehicle to stop;(b) to make a vehicle proceed in, or keep to, a particular line of traffic; and(c) to direct pedestrians to stop.(2) Sections 35 and 37 of the Road Traffic Act 1988 (offences of failing to comply with directions of constable engaged in regulation of traffic in a road) shall have effect in relation to the exercise of those powers for the purpose mentioned in sub- paragraph (1) by a person whose accreditation specifies that this paragraph applies to him as if the references to a constable engaged in regulation of traffic in a road were references to that person.(3) The powers conferred by virtue of this paragraph may be exercised in any police area in England and Wales.(4) In this paragraph “vehicle or trailer carrying a load of exceptional dimensions” means a vehicle or trailer the use of which is authorised by an order made by the Secretary of State under section 44(1)(d) of the Road Traffic Act 1988.Photographing of persons given fixed penalty notices[F10499ZA An accredited person whose accreditation specifies that this paragraph applies to him shall, within the relevant police area, have the power of a constable under section 64A(1A) of the 1984 Act (photographing of suspects etc.) to take a photograph, elsewhere than at a police station, of a person to whom the accredited person has given a penalty notice (or as the case may be a fixed penalty notice) inexercise of any power mentioned in paragraph 1(2) [F1050or in exercise of the power mentioned in paragraph 1A(3)].]
286	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 5A – Powers exercisable by accredited inspectorsDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesPower to modify paragraph [F10521(2A)][F1[0F510953A(1) The Secretary of State may by order amend paragraph 1(2A) so as to remove a provision from the list or add a provision to the list; but the list must contain only provisions mentioned in the first column of the Table in section 1(1) of the Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001.](2) The Secretary of State shall not make an order containing (with or without any other provision) any provision authorised by this paragraph unless a draft of that order has been laid before Parliament and approved by a resolution of each House.]Meaning of “relevant police area”10 In this Schedule “the relevant police area”, in relation to an accredited person, means the police area for which the police force whose chief officer granted his accreditation is maintained.[F1054SCHEDULE 5APOWERS EXERCISABLE BY ACCREDITED INSPECTORSPower to issue fixed penalty notices1 (1) An accredited inspector whose accreditation specifies that this paragraph applies to him shall have the powers specified in sub-paragraph (2) in relation to any individual1 
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 5A – Powers exercisable by accredited inspectors Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
287
who he has reason to believe has committed a relevant fixed penalty offence at a place within the relevant police area.(2) The powers are the powers of a constable F1055... to give a penalty notice under Chapter 1 of Part 1 of the Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (fixed penalty notices in respect of offences of disorder) so far as exercisable in respect of a relevant fixed penalty offence.Power to require giving of name and address2 (1) Where an accredited inspector whose accreditation specifies that this paragraph applies to him has reason to believe that a person has committed a relevant fixed penalty offence in the relevant police area, he may require the person to give him his name and address.(2) A person who fails to comply with a requirement under sub-paragraph (1) is guilty of an offence and shall be liable, on summary conviction, to a fine not exceeding level 3 on the standard scale.Photographing of persons given fixed penalty notices3 An accredited inspector whose accreditation specifies that this paragraph applies to him shall, within the relevant police area, have the power of a constable under section 64A(1A) of the 1984 Act (photographing of suspects etc) to take a photograph, elsewhere than at a police station, of a person to whom the accredited inspector has given a penalty notice in exercise of the powers mentioned in paragraph 1(2).Interpretation4 In this Schedule—  “the relevant police area”, in relation to an accredited inspector, means the police area for which the police force whose chief officer granted his accreditation is maintained;  “relevant fixed penalty offence”, in relation to an accredited inspector, means an offence which—(a) is an offence contained in a provision mentioned in the first column of the Table in section 1(1) of the Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001, and(b) is specified or described in his accreditation as an offence he has been accredited to enforce.](a) 
288	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 6Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesF1056F1056SCHEDULE 6F1056. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .SCHEDULE 7	Section 107MINOR AND CONSEQUENTIAL AMENDMENTSPolice (Scotland) Act 19671 (1) In subsection (1) of section 38A of the Police (Scotland) Act 1967 (c. 77) (police officers engaged on service outside their force), after paragraph (aa) there shall be inserted—“(ab) temporary service on which a person is engaged in accordance with arrangements made under paragraph 6(2) of Schedule 2 to the Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30) (service with the Independent Police Complaints Commission);”.(2) In subsection (6)(a) of that section, after “paragraph (a),” there shall be inserted “ (aa), ”.Superannuation Act 19722 (1) In Schedule 1 to the Superannuation Act 1972 (c. 11) (kinds of employment to which that Act applies), at the appropriate place in the entries under the heading “Royal Commissions and other Commissions”, there shall be inserted—“Independent Police Complaints Commission.”(2) In that Schedule, in the entries under the heading “Other bodies”, the words “Police Complaints Authority.” shall be omitted.Juries Act 19743 In Part 1 of Schedule 1 to the Juries Act 1974 (c. 23) (ineligibility for jury service), in Group B, after the entry relating to the Criminal Cases Review Commission there shall be inserted—“Chairman and members of the Independent Police Complaints Commission and any member of its staff who is not otherwise ineligible.”Rehabilitation of Offenders Act 19744 In section 7(2)(bb) of the Rehabilitation of Offenders Act 1974 (c. 53) (limitations on rehabilitations under Act etc.), for “a sex offender order under section 2 or, as the case may be, 20” there shall be substituted “ an order under section 2, 2A or 20 ”.1 
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 7 – Minor and Consequential Amendments Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
289
House of Commons Disqualification Act 19755 In Part 2 of Schedule 1 to the House of Commons Disqualification Act 1975 (c. 24) (bodies of which all members are disqualified)—(a) at the appropriate place, there shall be inserted— “The Independent Police Complaints Commission.;and”(b) the words “The Police Complaints Authority.” shall be omitted.Northern Ireland Assembly Disqualification Act 19756 In Part 2 of Schedule 1 to the Northern Ireland Assembly Disqualification Act 1975 (c. 25) (bodies of which all members are disqualified)—(a) at the appropriate place, there shall be inserted— “The Independent Police Complaints Commission.;and”(b) the words “The Police Complaints Authority.”shall be omitted.The Police Pensions Act 19767 (1) Section 11 of the Police Pensions Act 1976 (c. 35) (interpretation) shall be amended as follows.(2) In subsection (2) (meaning of “police authority” in relation to pensions)—(a) in paragraph (b), for “(c)”, in the second place where it occurs, there shall be substituted “ (ba) ”;(b) after paragraph (b) there shall be inserted—“(ba) in relation to service of the kind described in section 97(1) (aa) of the Police Act 1996 (c. 16) or section 38A(1)(aa) of the Police (Scotland) Act 1967 (c. 77), it means the Independent Police Complaints Commission;”(c) in paragraph (c), for “subsection (ba) or (bc) above” there shall be substituted “ paragraph (ba) or (bc) of subsection (1) ”;(d) in paragraph (d), for “subsection (bb) or (bd) above” there shall be substituted “ paragraph (bb) or (bd) of subsection (1) ”;(e) in paragraph (da), for “subsection (be)” there shall be substituted “ subsection (1)(be) ”.(3) In subsection (5) of that section, in the definition of “central service”, in each of paragraphs (a) and (b), after “paragraph” there shall be inserted “ (aa), ”.(4) After that subsection, there shall be inserted—“(6) References in this Act to the Director General of the National Criminal Intelligence Service and to his service have effect only in relation to cases in which the person in question was a serving police officer for the purposes of
290	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 7 – Minor and Consequential AmendmentsDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changessection 6 of the Police Act 1997 (c. 50) immediately before his appointment to that office took effect.”Rehabilitation of Offenders (Northern Ireland) Order 19788 In Article 8(2) of the Rehabilitation of Offenders (Northern Ireland) Order 1978 (S.I. 1978/ 1908 (N.I. 27)) (limitations on rehabilitation under Order etc.), after sub- paragraph (b) there shall be inserted—“(bb)  in any proceedings on an application for an order under Article 6 or 6A of the Criminal Justice (Northern Ireland) Order 1998 (S.I. 1998/ 2839 (N.I. 20)) or in any appeal against the making of such an order;”.The 1984 Act9 (1) In section 18(5) of the 1984 Act (power of constable to conduct search of an arrested person’s premises before taking him to a police station), for “taking the person” there shall be substituted “ the person is taken ”.(2) In section 54A(6) of that Act (persons entitled to carry out search or examination or to take photographs), for paragraphs (a) and (b) and the words after paragraph (b) there shall be substituted “ constables ”.(3) In section 61 of that Act (fingerprinting), before subsection (9) there shall be inserted—“(8B) The power to take the fingerprints of a person detained at a police station without the appropriate consent shall be exercisable by any constable.”(4) In section 63 of that Act (non-intimate samples), after subsection (9) there shall be inserted—“(9ZA) The power to take a non-intimate sample from a person without the appropriate consent shall be exercisable by any constable.”(5) In section 64A(3) of that Act (persons entitled to photograph detainees), for paragraphs (a) and (b) and the words after paragraph (b) there shall be substituted “ constables ”.(6) In subsection (7B) of section 67 of that Act (limited effect of modification of code of practice), in paragraph (c) for “order” there shall be substituted “ code ”.(7) After subsection (9) of that section there shall be inserted— “(9A) Persons on whom powers are conferred by—(a) any designation under section 38 or 39 of the Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30) (police powers for police authority employees), or(a) 
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 7 – Minor and Consequential Amendments Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
291
(b) any accreditation under section 41 of that Act (accreditation under community safety accreditation schemes),shall have regard to any relevant provision of a code of practice to which this section applies in the exercise or performance of the powers and duties conferred or imposed on them by that designation or accreditation.”(8) In subsection (10) of that section (failure to comply with codes not to render a person liable to civil or criminal proceedings), after paragraph (b) there shall be inserted “, or(c) of a person designated under section 38 or 39 or accredited under section 41 of the Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30) to have regard to any relevant provision of such a code in the exercise or performance of the powers and duties conferred or imposed on him by that designation or accreditation,”.(9) In section 118, at the beginning of subsection (2) (meaning of persons in police detention) there shall be inserted “ Subject to subsection (2A) ”; and after that subsection there shall be inserted—“(2A) Where a person is in another’s lawful custody by virtue of paragraph 22, 34(1) or 35(3) of Schedule 4 to the Police Reform Act 2002, he shall be treated as in police detention.”Prosecution of Offences Act 198510 In section 3(2) of the Prosecution of Offences Act 1985 (c. 23) (functions of the Director of Public Prosecutions), after paragraph (b) there shall be inserted—“(ba) to institute and have the conduct of any criminal proceedings in any case where the proceedings relate to the subject-matter of a report a copy of which has been sent to him under paragraph 23 or 24 of Schedule 3 to the Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30) (reports on investigations into conduct of persons serving with the police);”.Road Traffic Act 198811 (1) Section 103 of the Road Traffic Act 1988 (c. 52) (obtaining licence, or driving, while disqualified) shall be amended as follows.(2) Subsection (3) shall cease to have effect.(3) In subsection (4), for “Subsections (1) and (3) above do” there shall be substituted “ Subsection (1) above does ”.(4) In subsection (5), for “Subsections (1)(b) and (3) above do” there shall be substituted “ Subsection (1)(b) above does ”.(5) In subsection (6), for “subsections (1) and (3)” there shall be substituted “ subsection (1) ”.12 In section 183(1) of the Road Traffic Act 1988 (application to the Crown), in paragraph (c), the words “, except section 103(3)” shall be omitted.Aviation and Maritime Security Act 199013 In section 22(4) of the Aviation and Maritime Security Act 1990 (c. 31) (persons entitled to exercise certain powers in relation to private dwelling), in paragraph (b)1 
292	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 7 – Minor and Consequential AmendmentsDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(i), for the words from “Police Complaints Authority” to the end of the sub- paragraph there shall be substituted “ Independent Police Complaints Commission under section 26 of the Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30); or ”.The 1996 Act14 In section 8 of the 1996 Act (local policing plans), after subsection (4) there shall be inserted—“(4A) It shall be the duty of a police authority and of a chief constable, in preparing, issuing or submitting any plan or draft plan under this section, to have regard to any general guidance given by the Secretary of State with respect to local policing plans and the drafts of such plans.(4B) Before giving any guidance under subsection (4A), the Secretary of State shall consult with—(a) persons whom he considers to represent the interests of police authorities;(b) persons whom he considers to represent the interests of chief officers of police; and(c) such other persons as he thinks fit.”15 In section 54 of the 1996 Act (appointment and functions of inspectors of constabulary), before subsection (3) there shall be inserted—“(2D) It shall be the duty of the chief inspector of constabulary—(a) to enter into arrangements with the Independent Police Complaints Commission for the purpose of securing cooperation, in the carrying out of their respective functions, between the inspectors of constabulary and that Commission; and(b) to ensure that inspectors of constabulary provide that Commission with all such assistance and co-operation as may be required by those arrangements or as otherwise appears to the chief inspector to be appropriate for facilitating the carrying out by that Commission of its functions.”16 F1057. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .17 F1058. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .18 In section 87 of that Act (guidance concerning disciplinary proceedings), for subsection (2) there shall be substituted—1 
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 7 – Minor and Consequential Amendments Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
293
“(1A) The Secretary of State may also issue guidance to the Independent Police Complaints Commission concerning the discharge of its functions under any regulations under section 50 in relation to disciplinary proceedings.(2) Nothing in this section shall authorise the issuing of any guidance about a particular case.(3) It shall be the duty of every person to whom any guidance under this section is issued to have regard to that guidance in discharging the functions to which the guidance relates.(4) A failure by a person to whom guidance under this section is issued to have regard to the guidance shall be admissible in evidence in any disciplinary proceedings or on any appeal from a decision taken in any such proceedings.(5) In this section “disciplinary proceedings” means any proceedings under any regulations under section 50 that are identified as disciplinary proceedings by those regulations.”19 (1) In subsection (1) of section 97 of that Act (police officers engaged on service outside their force), after paragraph (a) there shall be inserted—“(aa) temporary service on which a person is engaged in accordance with arrangements made under paragraph 6(2) of Schedule 2 to the Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30) ;”.(2) F1059. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .(3) F1059. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Justices of the Peace Act 199720 F1060. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .The 1997 Act21 F1061. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
294	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 8 – RepealsDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesPolice (Northern Ireland) Act 199822 (1) In subsection (1) of section 27 of the Police (Northern Ireland) Act 1998 (c. 32) (police officers engaged on service outside the Police Service of Northern Ireland), after paragraph (a) there shall be inserted—“(aa)  temporary service on which a member of the police force is engaged in accordance with arrangements made under paragraph 6(2) of Schedule 2 to the Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30);”.(2) F1062. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Freedom of Information Act 200023 In Part 6 of Schedule 1 to the Freedom of Information Act 2000 (c. 36) (public bodies for the purposes of that Act)—(a) at the appropriate place, there shall be inserted— “The Independent Police Complaints Commission.;and”(b) the words “The Police Complaints Authority.” shall be omitted.Criminal Justice and Police Act 200124 F1063. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .SCHEDULE 8	Section 107REPEALS
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30) SCHEDULE 8 – Repeals Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
295
Short title and chapter	Extent of repealSuperannuation Act 1972 (c. 11)	In Schedule 1, in the entries under theheading “Other bodies”, the words “Police Complaints Authority.”
House of Commons Disqualification Act 1975 (c. 24)Northern Ireland Assembly Disqualification Act 1975 (c. 25)
In Part 2 of Schedule 1, the words “Police Complaints Authority.”In Part 2 of Schedule 1, the words “The Police Complaints Authority.”
Road Traffic Regulation Act 1984 (c. 27)	In section 96(3)—(a) in the words before paragraph (a), the words “163”; and(b) paragraph (c) and the word “or” immediately preceding it.(a) 
Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 (c. 60)
In section 67(10), the word “or” after paragraph (a).
Housing Act 1985 (c. 68)	In section 4(e), the words “the Metropolitan Police Authority”.Housing Act 1988 (c. 50)	In paragraph 12(2)(g) of Schedule 1, the words “and the Metropolitan Police Authority”.Road Traffic Act 1988 (c. 52)	Section 103(3).In section 183(1)(c), the words “, except section 103(3)”.Road Traffic Offenders Act 1988 (c. 53)	In section 34(3), the word “and” afterparagraph (a).Official Secrets Act 1989 (c. 6)	Section 11(1).
Criminal Justice and Public Order Act 1994 (c. 33)
Section 54(5).
Police Act 1996 (c. 16)	Section 42(5).In section 62(1B), the words “6 or”. Section 63(3)(b).Chapter 1 of Part 4.Section 86.In section 105(2), the words from “paragraph 8” to “that paragraph);”.In Schedule 2, paragraph 25. In Schedule 2A, paragraph 20. Schedule 5.Employment Rights Act 1996 (c. 18)	In section 200(1), the words “Part IVA,” and“47B”.Protection from Harassment Act 1997 (c. 40)  Section 2(3).
296	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)SCHEDULE 8 – RepealsDocument Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesPolice (Health and Safety) Act 1997 (c. 42)	F1064. . .Police Act 1997 (c. 50)	Section 6(3).In section 9, in subsection (2)(b), the words from “to which” to “applies”.Section 9A(2). Section 39(3). Section 42(6)(a).In section 55, in subsection (2)(b), the words from “to which” to “applies”.Section 55A(2).Public Interest Disclosure Act 1998 (c. 23)	Section 13.Police (Northern Ireland) Act 1998 (c. 32)	In Schedule 4, sub-paragraphs (2) to (4) ofparagraph 22, and sub-paragraph (9) of that paragraph, the words “and 55(3)(c)”.Crime and Disorder Act 1998 (c. 37)	In section 1—(a) the words after paragraph (b) of subsection (1); and(b) subsection (2).In section 5(1), the word “and” at the end of paragraph (a).Section 32(2).Section 84(2).
Football (Offences and Disorder) Act 1999 (c. 21)
Section 1(2)(f). Section 8(3) and (4).
Local Government Act 1999 (c. 27)	Section 24(3).Greater London Authority Act 1999 (c. 29)	In Schedule 27, paragraphs 51, 59, 90 and 97to 99.Police (Northern Ireland) Act 2000 (c. 32)	In Schedule 6, paragraph 20(4). Freedom of Information Act 2000 (c. 36)	In Part 6 of Schedule 1, the words “ThePolice Complaints Authority”.
Countryside and Rights of Way Act 2000 (c. 37)Criminal Justice and Court Services Act 2000 (c. 43)
In Schedule 12, paragraph 13.In Schedule 7, in paragraph 151, the words “5(2)(b)”.
Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)	Section 12(6).Section 46(6).Section 71.Section 80(2).Section 122(3).Section 123(3). Section 125(4)(b).In Schedule 6, paragraph 74.Anti-Terrorism, Crime and Security Act 2001 Section 82(1). (c. 24)	Section 94(3).
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30) SCHEDULE 8 – Repeals Document Generated: 2025-03-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
297

298	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Home  Crime, justice and the law  Reporting crimesReport a crime
Call 999 and ask for the police if you or someone else is in immediate danger, or the crime is in progress.To report a crime:  call the police on 101 - only works from within the UK contact the police online - in England, Wales and Northern Ireland  contact the police online - in ScotlandReport a crime anonymouslyReport a crime anonymously by contacting Crimestoppers.Crimestoppers Telephone: 0800 555 111Find out about call charges
Related contentHow to report antisocial behaviour Report a noise nuisance to your council Report an immigration or border crime Report benefit fraudReport hate crime
You cannot use Crimestoppers to report: that you or someone else is in danger  that you have been a victim of crime benefit fraud  scam emails or calls  untaxed vehicles or minor driving o?ences - such as speedingWhere to get supportFind out what support y ou can get if y ou’re the victim of crime.Explore the topicReporting crimesReporting vehicle and driving o?encesElsewhere on the webGet support as a victim of crimeReport a noise nuisance to your council Report discarded syring esReport vandalismServices and informationGovernment activityBenefitsEducation and learningDepartmentsBirths, death, marriages and careEmploying peopleNewsBusiness and self-employedEnvironment and countrysideGuidance and regulationChildcare and parentingHousing and local servicesResearch and statisticsCitizenship and living in the UKMoney and taxPolicy papers and consultationsCrime, justice and the lawPassports, travel and living abroadTransparencyDisabled peopleVisas and immigrationHow government worksDriving and transportWorking, jobs and pensionsGet involved
Home  Business and self-employed  Business debt and bankruptcyReport a loan shark
Loan sharks are illegal moneylenders who often charge very high interestrates. You can check if a company is authorised to lend money and report loan sharks anonymously.Check if a lender is registeredYou can search the Financial Services Register for companies and individuals authorised by the Financial Conduct Authority (FCA).FCAconsumer.queries@fca.org.uk Telephone: 0800 111 6768 Monday to Friday, 8am to 6pm Saturday, 9am to 1pmFind out about call charges
Related contentBaili? powers when they visit your home Options for dealing with your debts
Report a loan sharkIf you spot a loan shark or you’ve borrowed money from one you can report them anonymously.EnglandIllegal Money Lending TeamReport a loan shark online reportaloanshark@stoploansharks.gov.uk Telephone: 0300 555 222224- hour serviceText a report to 07860 022 116 Find out about call chargesWalesWales Illegal Money Lending Unitimlu@cardi?.gov.uk Telephone: 0300 123 3311 24-hour serviceText a report to 07772 608 931 Find out about call chargesScotlandTrading Standards Scotland Report a loan shark online Telephone: 0800 074 0878 24-hour serviceFind out about call chargesNorthern IrelandTrading Standards Consumerline www.consumerline.org Telephone: 0300 123 6262Find out about call chargesExplore the topicBusiness debt and bankruptcy Reporting crimesYour rights and legal support Court claims, debt and bankruptcyServices and informationGovernment activityBenefitsEducation and learningDepartmentsBirths, death, marriages and careEmploying peopleNewsBusiness and self-employedEnvironment and countrysideGuidance and regulationChildcare and parentingHousing and local servicesResearch and statisticsCitizenship and living in the UKMoney and taxPolicy papers and consultationsCrime, justice and the lawPassports, travel and living abroadTransparencyDisabled peopleVisas and immigrationHow government worksDriving and transportWorking , jobs and pensionsGet involved
Home  Crime, justice and the law  Your rights and legal supportReport a problem with a medicine or medical device
Report a suspected problem (‘adverse incident’) with a medicine or medicaldevice using the Yellow Card Scheme as soon as possible, for example if: a medicine causes side e?ects someone’s injured (or almost injured) by a medical device, either because its labelling or instructions aren’t clear, it’s broken or has been misused  a patient’s treatment is interrupted because of a faulty device someone receives the wrong diagnosis because of a medical device  a medicine doesn’t work properly a medicine is of a poor quality you think a medicine or medical device is fake or counterfeit Anyone can report a problem.The Yellow Card Scheme can’t give you medical advice - talk to a doctor or pharmacist.
Related content Consumer advice Consumer rightsCollectionLatest information for patients
on the Yellow Card Scheme websiteBefore you startThere’s a di?erent way to report a problem with a medical device if you’re in Wales, Scotland or Northern Ireland.What happens nextThe Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency, the manufacturer or a medical specialist may investigate the problem depending on how serious it is. It’ll be recorded to help prevent similar incidents in future, even if it’s not investigated.You’ll receive a confirmation of your report. You’ll be contacted if you need to provide more information.More information on medicinesRead the patient information leaflet for the type of medicine you want to report if you had a side e?ect (for example drowsiness or nausea) - it will give you advice on what you should do.You can also read a list of reported side e?ects.Explore the topicYour rights and legal supportElsewhere on the webNHS ChoicesServices and informationGovernment activityBenefitsEducation and learningDepartmentsBirths, death, marriages and careEmploying peopleNewsBusiness and self-employedEnvironment and countrysideGuidance and regulationChildcare and parentingHousing and local servicesResearch and statisticsCitizenship and living in the UKMoney and taxPolicy papers and consultationsCrime, justice and the lawPassports, travel and living abroadTransparencyDisabled peopleVisas and immigrationHow government worksDriving and transportWorking , jobs and pensionsGet involved
Home  Crime, justice and the law  Reporting crimesReport hate crime
Crimes committed against someone because of their disability, transgender- identity, race, religion or belief, or sexual orientation are hate crimes and should be reported to the police.Hate crimes can include:	threatening behaviour 	assault	robbery	damage to property	inciting others to commit hate crimes 	harassment	online abuseYou can report hate crime online.Call 999 if you’re reporting a crime that’s in progress or if someone is in immediate danger.
Related contentGet support as a victim of crime Discrimination: your rights
If the crime isn’t an emergency, call 101 or contact your local police. Find out what support y ou can get if y ou’re the victim of crime.Get support if y ou’re a victim of hate crime in Scotland.Explore the topicReporting crimesServices and informationGovernment activityBenefitsEducation and learningDepartmentsBirths, death, marriages and careEmploying peopleNewsBusiness and self-employedEnvironment and countrysideGuidance and regulationChildcare and parentingHousing and local servicesResearch and statisticsCitizenship and living in the UKMoney and taxPolicy papers and consultationsCrime, justice and the lawPassports, travel and living abroadTransparencyDisabled peopleVisas and immigrationHow government worksDriving and transportWorking, jobs and pensionsGet involved
Report suspicious activity to MI5Report any threats to national security - such as terrorism and espionage - to MI5 (also known as the Security Service).on the MI5 websiteBefore you startCall 999 or the police anti-terrorist hotline on 0800 789 321 to report an immediate threat to life or property.ConfidentialityYour message will be sent over a secure internet connection. You can choose to remain anonymous or include your contact details so the Security Service can get in touch with you.All the information you send will be treated confidentially.Other ways to contact MI5You can report threats by phone or in writing.MI5Freephone: 0800 111 4645Telephone: 020 7930 9000From outside the UK: +44 (0)20 7930 9000 Find out about call charg es (/call-charg es)
The Enquiries Desk PO Box 3255London SW1P 1AEAll content is available under the Open GovernmentLicence v3.0, except where otherwise stated	© Crown copyright
Reporting and acting on child abuse and neglectSummary of consultation responses and Government action05 March 2018
© Crown copyright 2018This publication is licensed under the terms of the Open Government Licence v3.0 except where otherwise stated. To view this licence, visit nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government- licence/version/3Where we have identified any third party copyright information you will need to obtain permission from the copyright holders concerned.Alternative format versions of this report are available on request fromthe Home Office, Safeguarding Unit, 2 Marsham Street, London SW1P 4DF (email: reportingandacting@homeoffice.gsi.gov.uk).
ContentsIntroduction	2Summary of responses and conclusions	3Government response	5Government action	7Analysis of consultation responses	12Current child protection system	15Other measures that could be introduced	16Mandatory Reporting	16Duty to act	19Respondents’ preferred approach	21Scope, accountability and sanctions	22Additional information	26Annex A – The consultation analysis process	28Annex B – List of organisations that responded	29Annex C – Additional research submitted	351
IntroductionAll children are owed the right to be safe from harm. Keeping children safe is the responsibility of everyone who comes into contact with children and families, and we all have a role to play in protecting children and young people from child abuse and neglect.1. We are absolutely clear that practitioners should make an immediate referral to local authority children’s social care if they believe that a child has suffered harm or is likely to do so. This expectation is set out in the cross-sector Working Together to Safeguard Children statutory guidance. Approaching 650,000 referrals were made to local authority children’s social care services in England in 2016–17.2. We know, however, that despite the best efforts of practitioners working with children and families – across children’s social care, the police, health, education, and the charity sector – some abuse and neglect has gone undetected by statutory agencies. This can happen for a variety of reasons, including failures to report or share information properly, and failures to perceive abuse or understand the nature and level of the risk of harm faced by children. In a small but important number of cases, there have been allegations of deliberate cover-ups or malpractice. The Government is clear no sector or organisation is above the need for robust safeguarding arrangements. We all have a responsibility to protect children from harm and abuse and a moral duty to report a crime.3. In circumstances where frontline practitioners do fail to identify or fail to report the signs of abuse and neglect, the consequences can be catastrophic and leave a lasting and devastating impact on the lives of victims and their families.4. Acknowledging the importance of these issues and the need to explore all options for improvement, on 21 July 2016, the Government launched a 12-week consultation on ‘Reporting and acting on child abuse and neglect’. In particular, the Government’s consultation document took a neutral stance in setting out possible options and recognised the strength of feeling amongst some survivors’ groups and other voices in the sector that more needed to be done to change the way knowledge about children at risk of harm was shared, and that in particular, a mandatory reporting duty was often raised as the potential solution. It was essential to give these issues fair consideration with an unwavering focus on how we might be able to improve outcomes for children. The Government agreed on the need to consult widely due to the complexity and sensitivity of the issue, and the scale of the potential impact on practice across a wide range of professions. The consultation sought views on whether to introduce new statutory measures focused on reporting and acting on child abuse and neglect, in addition to our ongoing programme of wide-ranging reforms.5. The headline question in the consultation asked which of the following three options was most preferable:ï allowing the package of reform measures focused on improving how the whole system responds to child abuse and neglect to be implemented before considering the introduction of additional statutory measures;ï the introduction of a duty to act, focused on taking appropriate action in relation to child abuse and neglect, with sanctions for deliberate and reckless failures; orï the introduction of a mandatory reporting duty focused on increasing the reporting of child abuse and neglect.6. Copies of this document have been placed in the House Library and it is available via the gov.uk website [www.gov.uk].2
Summary of responses and conclusions7. The consultation opened on 21 July 2016 and closed on 13 October 2016, receiving 768 responses. In addition, the Government held a roundtable meeting chaired by the then Minister for Vulnerability, Safeguarding and Countering Extremism. The event was held in Rotherham and was attended by victim and survivor groups and key voluntary organisations. We are grateful to everyone who took the time to respond to the consultation and to provide views on these critical issues.8. The majority of responses (609) were received via an online survey, with 97 survey responses received offline and another 62 submissions coming via email or post. Responses were received from a wide range of sources, representing different interests and perspectives. This included responses from organisations representing practitioners1 and others in the local government, education, early years and healthcare sectors, as well as responses from the police, children’s charities, survivors’ groups and members of the public. A full breakdown can be found in the ‘Analysis’ section of this document. A list of organisations which responded can be found at Annex B.9. The majority of respondents to the consultation (63%) were in favour of allowing the Government’s existing programme of reforms time to be fully embedded. Only a quarter of respondents (25%) favoured introducing a duty to act, with less than half of that number (12%) favouring the introduction of mandatory reporting.10. The consultation asked for feedback on the key issues within the current child protection system. The areas where respondents thought that improvement was most needed was in better joint working between different local agencies (93%), further work to encourage new and innovative practice (85%) and better training for practitioners (81%). These are clearly important areas for the Government to focus on in the next stage of our reform programme – how we intend to do so is set out in the ‘Government action’ section below.11. The majority of respondents (51%) agreed that a duty to act would have an adverse impact on the child protection system (such as impacting recruitment and retention of staff, and negatively impacting the serious case review process). A quarter of respondents (25%) were attracted to the idea of the duty to act. Two-thirds of respondents (67%) agreed that a duty to act would strengthen accountability in the system. Over half of respondents (57%) agreed that it would be more likely to improve outcomes for children than a duty focused solely on reporting. A number of respondents suggested that further consultation would be required should such a duty be developed in future.12. Respondents were more concerned about the potential negative impact of introducing a mandatory reporting regime. Over two-thirds of respondents (68%) agreed that such a duty would have an adverse impact on the child protection system. Eighty-five percent (85%) of respondents agreed that mandatory reporting would not ensure that appropriate action would be taken to protect children. Just over two-thirds of respondents (70%) agreed that a statutory mandatory reporting duty would generate more child abuse and neglect reports, but a similar proportion of respondents (66%) agreed that it could divert attention from the most serious child abuse and neglect cases.1 The term ‘practitioners’ was used throughout the consultation to refer to individuals who work with children in any capacity.3
13. One argument made in individual responses to the consultation was for different forms of mandatory reporting based on reporting within ‘closed institutions’ or ‘regulated activities’. These models, their rationale and the issues associated with them were described in annex B of the consultation materials.14. A small number of individual respondents (including the Office of the Children’s Commissioner and the NSPCC) raised the idea of a concealment offence in relation to child abuse and neglect. It was felt this might address scenarios where there is a conflict between reporting and the potential reputational damage to an institution.15. Additional recent research evidence not included within the summary of research in the consultation materials was also submitted through the consultation process, as requested within the consultation document itself.2 In formulating the Government response, all such material has been considered carefully.2  References at annex C.4
Government responseThis section sets out our assessment of responses to the consultation and the Government’s own response, considering the evidence and the impact of the options on which we consulted. Whilst we have not found conclusive evidence to show that reporting and referrals are a current systemic issue, there are significant concerns by a clear majority should mandatory reporting be introduced. A mandatory reporting duty or duty to act brings with it a range of risks which are outlined here, including the impact on identifying abuse and neglect, on practitioners’ professional judgement, and for children’s outcomes.16. The Government has considered the issues objectively and from the point of view of what would likely be best for children – informed by, but not bound by the result of the consultation. This includes the question of whether, given the Government’s commitment to doing all it can to protect children from abuse and neglect, mandatory reporting or a duty to act would have a positive impact on keeping children safe.17. Having considered all of the evidence and the views raised by the consultation, the Government believes that the case for a mandatory reporting duty or duty to act has not currently been made. Therefore, we do not intend to introduce a mandatory reporting duty or duty to act at this time. The following sections set out our assessment of the issues raised by the consultation, the most effective responses and how they will inform Government policy, and the importance of continuing to assess the evidence on mandatory reporting and how this might alter our understanding of what works best for children.18. The key premise behind a mandatory reporting duty is the threat of sanctions that would then be imposed on those who choose not, or otherwise fail to report concerns about child abuse and neglect. This in turn would lower the threshold for practitioners choosing to report a concern, with a lower likelihood of being dissuaded from doing so – including in cases where, for example, they are unsure what they have seen, they are influenced by professional cautiousness, or they are fearful of the reputational damage that making a report may cause. Supporters of mandatory reporting argue that this reduces the risk that serious cases will pass unnoticed and therefore results in better protection for children.19. The Government recognises the importance of these points – and the effect following the introduction of mandatory reporting in other countries such as Australia, suggests that referrals do indeed increase where mandatory reporting is in place. However, even compared to countries which have mandatory reporting systems, the rate of referrals is comparable or already higher here: 54.8 per 1,000 children in England (2016/17), compared to 53.2 per 1,000 children in the USA (2015), and 42.0 per 1,000 children in Australia (2015/16).20. Our imperative is to ensure that the right children get the right support and protection, at the right time. But even with an increase in referrals associated with mandatory reporting, this would not necessarily lead to an increase in subsequent engagement with children brought into the child protection system. The increasing number of referrals rather risks creating a ‘needle in a haystack’ effect in which it is less likely, rather than more likely, that the social care system will identify key cases. Implementation of a mandatory reporting duty may also result in less consideration of the most appropriate stage for referrals, leading to a ‘tick box’ procedural approach – not only by social workers, but also those practitioners referring cases including in health, education and the police. Again, this would not help children’s social care to identify key cases.5
21. Furthermore, mandatory reporting will not itself improve the quality of practitioners’ judgement about whether what they are seeing is abuse or neglect, and how best to respond; this remains the ultimate focus for best supporting children at risk of harm. Many serious incidents occur with children already known to social care. Indeed, the triennial analysis of serious case reviews, in particular, demonstrates that in most cases the significant harm or death of children occurs despite their being known to children’s social care. A mandatory reporting duty would have been of limited value for protecting children in those cases. It could, however, further undermine effective practice by instilling risk-averse behaviour driven by the fear of sanctions, rather empowering the workforce to make the right decisions.22. This impact could be felt not only in children’s social care, but by practitioners more widely across health, education and the police. If disproportionate attention is placed on referrals and reporting, it may deter organisations and agencies outside social care from working effectively with children on lower-level issues, engendering an attitude that once the report has been made, they have discharged their responsibilities. Beyond the risks associated with mandatory reporting, a broader duty to act does not itself support judgements about what action to take, and risks creating defensive barriers to effective decision-making rather than trust in practitioners to discharge the obligations to act that they already have.23. If a mandatory reporting duty or duty to act were introduced, we must expect alongside the increase in referrals, an increase in the intervention in the lives of children and families. This may undermine confidentiality for those contemplating disclosure of abuse with victims more reluctant to make disclosures if they know that it will result in a record of their contact being made. The prospect of such contact may cause families to disengage with services. It is worth stating, however, that even if this important issue were to be discounted, the serious questions about the inherent effectiveness of a mandatory reporting duty for improving children’s outcomes would remain.24. Most fundamentally, the evidence and submissions received through the consultation has not demonstrated conclusively that the introduction of a mandatory reporting duty or a duty to act improves outcomes for children. This must be our guiding consideration when considering such a major reform of such a vital service.25. What the consultation has shown us, together with serious case reviews and Ofsted inspections, is that professional experience and other evidence generally does not find reporting to be a key issue in cases where a child is failed. Whether a child is already known to social care or not, translating practitioners’ knowledge of a child’s ongoing needs into appropriate support can be the difference between life and death. Such evidence suggested that issues around information sharing, professional practice and decision making are more likely to be at the crux of incidents where children do not receive the protection they need.26. What would ultimately be most effective is improved information sharing, supported by better multi-agency working, better assessments, better decision making and better working with children at all stages of their engagement with the safeguarding system. This is at the heart of the Government’s reform programme, particularly focused around multi-agency cooperation and social work. We believe this programme, much of which is particularly focused on how local agencies effectively act on information already gathered about children at risk of harm, rather than being focused on the referral stage, is the more effective way to address the concern raised by proponents of mandatory reporting that children might be ‘missed’ by the system. If our reforms are effective, a mandatory reporting duty would not be needed, and these reforms will themselves work most effectively without the unintended consequences that may occur due to the introduction of a reporting duty.6
Government actionThis section sets out the targeted action that the Government is taking in response to issues raised by consultation. In particular, we will address four key issues around reporting and acting on child abuse. These include the importance of understanding and reporting abuse, information sharing between agencies that work with children, best practice and professional training, and continuing to assess the legal framework and evidence to ensure the approach we are taking is effective and adequate.27. We have already overseen significant reforms to the child protection system, following the conclusion of the Munro Review of Child Protection in 2011, but we want to do more to deliver the best outcomes for children, and are doing so. The policy paper Putting Children First (2016) set out how we are transforming the children’s social care system by delivering major reforms under key pillars:ï people and leadership – bringing the best into the profession and giving them the right knowledge and skills for the challenging but hugely rewarding work ahead, and developing leaders equipped to nurture practice excellence;ï practice and systems – creating the right environment for excellent practice and innovation to flourish, learning from the very best practice, and learning from when things go wrong; andï governance and accountability – making sure that what we are doing is working, and developing innovative new organisational models with the potential to radically improve services.28. We are already taking steps to deliver improvements in safeguarding and child protection which we expect will bring real benefits to children. We also recognise that there are more steps we can take to enhance the likelihood of abuse and neglect being recognised and reported at an earlier point so that the appropriate action can be taken.29. We will address directly the issues raised by the consultation through a combination of these ongoing reforms and the following programme of action.To ensure there is strong awareness of the risks and need to report abuse, we are:30. Launching a further phase of our communications campaign, Together, we can tackle child abuse. The third phase of the campaign continues to raise awareness, improve understanding and normalise reporting behaviour in communities so that more children can be kept safe from harm. The campaign builds public understanding of how to interpret and act on concerns, educating individuals about the signs of abuse and neglect, and encouraging reporting. Through the campaign we will also engage with local authorities and practitioners in areas such as police, health and education, to reinforce existing professional duties to take action if they have concerns about a child’s welfare, where reporting a concern is more important than protecting the reputation of an individual or organisation.31. Making Relationships Education and Relationships and Sex Education (RSE) mandatory in all schools. Given the increasing concerns around child sexual abuse and exploitation and the growing risks associated with growing up in a digital world, there is a particularly compelling case to act so that children are better equipped to protect themselves. That is why we are legislating to make the subjects of Relationships Education mandatory in all primary schools and RSE mandatory in all secondary schools. Whilst we are clear that the most pressing safeguarding concerns relate to Relationships Education and RSE, it is evident7
that wider concerns about child safety and wellbeing relate to the core knowledge these subjects can teach, such as understanding of the risks of drugs and alcohol, and safeguarding physical and mental health. We therefore think it is important that we have the ability to make Personal, Social, Health and Economic Education (PSHE) mandatory as well, subject to the outcome of thorough consideration of the subject. The Department for Education has conducted a thorough engagement process on the scope and content of Relationships Education and RSE, including further consideration of PSHE. This process involved engagement with stakeholders and a public call for evidence, and will be followed by a formal consultation on the resulting regulations and guidance. Elsewhere the Government has also provided £2.3 million funding for the second phase of the successful ‘Disrespect Nobody’ campaign, which raises young people’s awareness of healthy relationships and safe choices.32. Increasing the effectiveness of Keeping Children Safe in Education (KCSIE) guidance. We plan to update this guidance for education professionals to reflect current safeguarding concerns and understanding of good practice, including an already strong focus on the importance of referrals and information sharing. We published a public consultation into proposed revisions to KCSIE on 14 December 2017, the consultation closing on 22 February 2018. The intention is to publish revised guidance, for information, in the summer term 2018 to be effective from September 2018.33. Targeting support for areas where abuse concerns are emerging, including in sport. In response to allegations of non-recent child sexual abuse that surfaced in late 2016, the Department for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport is working with other government departments and the sport sector to ensure that sports clubs and organisations have strong processes in place for dealing with any allegations of non-recent abuse and to ensure that current arrangements for safeguarding children and young people in sports environments are as robust as possible. Our Together, we can tackle child abuse communications campaign aims to reach practitioners and volunteers across a broad range of sectors and communities, including those not part of traditional child protection arrangements, and in both regulated and non-regulated professions and settings.34. Creating a safe space for whistle-blowers. We have established a whistleblowing helpline for practitioners to raise concerns about their organisation’s ability to protect children from abuse and neglect. Such measures are vitally important to counter the sort of behaviour where it appears the imperative to report and act on child abuse is wrongly counterbalanced, or even outweighed, by a desire to safeguard personal status, institutional reputation or profitability.To improve information sharing, we are:35. Improving multi-agency working, in particular local information sharing. Following the passage of the Children and Social Work Act 2017, we will introduce, during the current parliament, new multi-agency safeguarding arrangements to ensure shared and strengthened ownership of local safeguarding, replacing Local Safeguarding Children Boards. This is a major reform of the fundamental workings of local child protection. By supporting local areas to develop stronger, bespoke working arrangements between local authorities, health and the police, we expect to see a step change in the quality of inter-agency work to safeguard children. The new arrangements will provide additional powers to secure effective participation from key agencies and agree plans to strengthen information sharing. We know that the best multi-agency arrangements are those which enshrine consistent and effective information sharing arrangements. These improvements to the system of multi-agency working at a local level will be coupled with new arrangements for reviewing serious child safeguarding cases at both the local and national level, as well as new child death review arrangements.8
36. In support, a public consultation was launched last autumn on the related secondary legislation and revised statutory guidance (Working Together to Safeguard Children) which closed on 31 December 2017. We are preparing for formal commencement of the new arrangements, and publication of the updated guidance later in 2018.37. Tackling the barriers to information sharing, including considering legislative improvements to support more effective information sharing for safeguarding purposes between practitioners. We will also look again at the Government’s information sharing practice guidance to examine what more can be done to break down common barriers to sharing information. We will also look to strengthen the forthcoming update of the NHS Confidentiality Code to make it clear when information about vulnerable children and young people should be shared.38. Supporting the Child Protection Information Sharing project. This NHS Digital-led IT system links information on looked after children and children on child protection plans between local authorities and unscheduled health settings (such as emergency departments or walk-in centres), in order to help practitioners make decisions about how to keep children safe. We are investing in an accelerator fund to support local authorities and health settings to implement the system.39. Expanding and strengthening the information sharing requirements in Working Together to Safeguard Children. As part of our revisions we have strengthened and consolidated existing guidance for practitioners on sharing information, including the guidance for practitioners on referring concerns to local authority children’s social care. The guidance, incorporated from practice guidance now into statutory guidance, makes clear that where there are concerns about the safety and welfare of children all practitioners should share information without hesitation or concern for their individual or organisational reputation. Working Together is now also clear that action should be taken by employers against practitioners whose conduct and/or practice falls below acceptable standards.To improve practice and decision-making, we are:40. Improving the skills and confidence of practitioners so that they can better safeguard and promote the welfare of children. A national assessment and accreditation system for social work will introduce a new practice-focused assessment to establish the knowledge and skills that child and family social workers need. Amongst other social work workforce reforms set out in our Putting Children First paper3, we are establishing through provisions in the Children and Social Work Act 2017, a new specialist regulator for social workers in England. Over time, the regulator, Social Work England, will drive up standards in social work education, training and practice and operate a quality assurance system for continuous professional development ensuring all social workers remain fit to practice. We will also consider how statutory guidance supporting the new multi-agency safeguarding arrangements could support the provision of effective multi-agency safeguarding training within local areas. Separately, we are also committed to improving training for the police and health service providers in the context of tackling child sexual abuse. The Home Office has made £1.9m available to the College of Policing to deliver a package of specialist training for vulnerability, essentially introducing a ‘licence to practise’ regime.41. Increasing accountability in the child protection system. We have put in place a new system of joint targeted area inspections by Ofsted, the Care Quality Commission, HMI Constabulary and HMI Probation, as part of strengthening local authority children’s services inspections more widely.3  https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/putting-children-first-our-vision-for-childrens-social-care9
42. Introducing a new Child Safeguarding Practice Review Panel. Implementing the changes in the Children and Social Work Act 2017, a new system of national and local reviews will create a national framework for considering the lessons of the tragic events where a child is seriously harmed or dies. Despite changes to improve serious case reviews over a number of years, a systemic suspicion persists that their main purpose is to apportion blame. The new system of child safeguarding practice reviews will be supported by tighter regulation and guidance. This will lead to a national learning framework predicated on high quality, published, local and national learning inquiries, with the clear purpose of identifying improvements both locally and nationally.43. Building our knowledge of best practice in child protection. We have a comprehensive programme of work which by 2020 will create a new national learning system for children’s social care. This will see the strengthening of the evidence base via the Children’ Social Care Innovation Programme and Partners in Practice, along with practice improvements identified through a new Child Safeguarding Practice Review Panel and a What Works Centre for Children’s Social Care. We also need to do more to properly understand the nature of child sexual abuse and how best to address it. To this end, we launched a new Centre of Expertise on Child Sexual Abuse with £7.5m of long term funding, which aims to identify, generate and share high quality evidence of what works to prevent and tackle child sexual abuse and exploitation to inform policy and practice.44. Delivering a focused programme of reforms to tackle child sexual abuse. In February 2017, the Government published its Tackling Child Sexual Exploitation: Progress Report and announced a £40m package of measures to protect children and young people from sexual abuse, exploitation and trafficking and to bring offenders to justice.45. We have prioritised child sexual abuse as a national policing threat and are investing in specialist policing capability to ensure children are better protected. We provided significant extra investment to transform the police approach to child sexual exploitation (CSE), through our Police Transformation Fund, and the National Crime Agency has also received additional funding which will help it to tackle online child sexual exploitation even more effectively. The NCA’s CEOP Command leads the law enforcement response to online child sexual exploitation and abuse and works with law enforcement agencies in the UK and overseas, to identify victims and pursue offenders engaged in grooming children on the internet. Specifically, £20 million has been provided to help combat child sexual exploitation and significantly increase our capability to target the online grooming of children.46. The new Centre of Expertise on Child Sexual Abuse will also assess UK and international evidence on prevalence, responses and what works in tackling child sexual abuse and exploitation.To ensure the action we are taking is effective and adequate, we are:47. Assessing whether the current legislative framework is able to deal appropriately with concerns about concealment of child abuse and neglect. As noted above, a small number of organisations that responded to the consultation suggested that a specific criminal offence in this area should be introduced. We will commit to scoping this issue fully and identify whether there are any gaps in the current statutory framework during the current Parliament, including working with representative organisations such as the NSPCC and the Office of the Children’s Commissioner. An appropriate offence would constitute the strongest response in terms of deterring and criminalising intentional cover-ups, such as those that advocates of mandatory reporting have pointed to in closed institutions. Such an offence may allow us to set a clearer bar in terms of targeting the most wilful and egregious behaviour. This may provide the strongest and most targeted response to address cases where child abuse is not reported due to a desire to protect personal position or institutional position.10
48. It should also be noted that the Independent Inquiry on Child Sexual Abuse (IICSA) is looking at a range of settings in which there may have been institutional failings and high-profile instances of child sexual abuse being covered up. The Inquiry is hearing evidence currently and will present its recommendations in due course, which we will use to inform our future considerations.49. Continuing to monitor and evaluate the evidence. Notwithstanding all of the arguments and existing evidence set out in this response, the Government remains committed to taking whatever action is necessary to protect the safety of every child. We recognise past failures where children have been let down, and the progress still needed to realise our vision of services which always deliver the support children need at the time they need it. It has been valuable to explore these issues and to give proposed new statutory measures thorough consideration. However it is evident that there is not generally a demand for this proposal from those working in the sector or more generally from those responding to our consultation. We have also considered the effectiveness of the proposal under an assumption that greater resources could be made available, for instance for more social workers working at the front door of social care, or to fund assessment of a greater number of children. Even approached this way, at the current time, the case for a mandatory reporting duty has not been made, but we will remain open-minded should an emerging body of evidence or a new policy landscape change that.50. We will continue to evaluate whether our reform programme is having the intended impact once fully implemented, in addition to continuing to assess any new or different evidence on mandatory reporting. The new Child Safeguarding Practice Review Panel will identify consistent and systemic errors in how children are protected, including any recurring issues around reporting, and this will be valuable to our ongoing assessment. We will also in particular be interested to understand evidence emerging from the recent introduction of a mandatory reporting duty in Wales placed at an organisational level, and any other new international evidence, to consider whether this alters the conclusions we have drawn from the current evidence. The same applies to the mandatory reporting duty for female genital mutilation, which came into force in 2015, informed by monitoring the impact this has had in practice. If the evidence strongly suggested that a mandatory reporting duty was likely to improve outcomes for children, whether now or at a future time, the Government would not hesitate to act to make the reforms necessary.11
Analysis of consultation responsesThe consultation approach51. On 21 July 2016, the Government launched a 12-week public consultation exercise to seek views on the key issues in the current system and whether to introduce new statutory measures focused on reporting and acting on child abuse and neglect, in addition to our ongoing programme of wide-ranging reforms.52. The consultation closed on 13 October 2016 and we received 768 responses. In addition, we held a roundtable meeting chaired by the then Parliamentary Under Secretary of State for Vulnerability, Safeguarding and Countering Extremism, Sarah Newton MP. The event was held in Rotherham and was attended by victim and survivor groups and key voluntary organisations. We are grateful to everyone who took the time to respond to the consultation and to provide their views on these critical issues.53. The majority of responses (609) were received via an online survey, with 97 survey responses received offline and another 62 submissions coming via email or post. Responses were received from a wide range of sources, representing different interests and perspectives. This included responses from organisations representing practitioners and others in the local government, education, early years and healthcare sectors, as well as responses from the police, children’s charities, survivors’ groups and members of the public. A list of organisations which responded can be found at Annex B.Summary of responses and main findings54. The headline question in the consultation asked which of the following three options was most preferable:ï allowing the package of reform measures focused on improving how the whole system responds to child abuse and neglect to be implemented before considering the introduction of additional statutory measures;ï the introduction of a duty to act, focused on taking appropriate action in relation to child abuse and neglect, with sanctions for deliberate and reckless failures; orï the introduction of a mandatory reporting duty focused on increasing the reporting of child abuse and neglect.55. The majority of respondents to the consultation (63%) were in favour of allowing the Government’s existing programme of reforms time to be implemented. Only a quarter of respondents (25%) favoured introducing a duty to act, with less than half of that number (12%) favouring the introduction of mandatory reporting.56. The consultation asked for feedback on the key issues within the current child protection system. The areas where respondents thought that improvement was most needed was in better joint working between different local agencies (93%), further work to encourage new and innovative practice (85%) and better training for practitioners (81%).57. The majority of respondents (51%) agreed that a duty to act would have an adverse impact on the child protection system (e.g. impacting recruitment and retention of staff, and negatively impacting the serious case review process). A quarter of respondents (25%) were attracted to the idea of the duty to act. Two-thirds of respondents (67%) agreed that a duty to act would strengthen accountability in the system. Over half of respondents (57%) agreed that it would be more likely to improve outcomes for children than a duty focused solely on reporting. A12
number of respondents suggested that further consultation would be required should such a duty be developed in future.58. Respondents were more concerned about the potential negative impact of introducing a mandatory reporting regime. Over two-thirds of respondents (68%) agreed that such a duty would have an adverse impact on the child protection system (e.g. impacting recruitment and retention of staff, and negatively impacting the serious case review process). Eighty-five percent (85%) of respondents agreed that mandatory reporting would not ensure that appropriate action would be taken to protect children. Just over two-thirds of respondents (70%) agreed that a statutory mandatory reporting duty would generate more child abuse and neglect reports, but a similar proportion of respondents (66%) agreed that it could divert attention from the most serious child abuse and neglect cases.59. A small number of respondents to the consultation argued in favour of different forms of mandatory reporting based on reporting within ‘closed institutions’ or ‘regulated activities’. These models, their rationale and the issues associated with them were described in annex B of the consultation materials.60. A small number of respondents raised the idea of a concealment offence in relation to child abuse and neglect. They felt this might address scenarios where there is a conflict between reporting and the potential reputational damage to an institution.61. Additional recent research evidence not included within the summary of research in the consultation materials was also submitted through the consultation process, as requested within the consultation document itself.4 In formulating the Government response, all such material has been considered carefully.Expanded analysis of results62. Of those who responded to the consultation, 337 self-reported their professional sector. Those who responded by letter or email and who did not report their professional sector, were assigned one on the basis of other information in their response, wherever possible. The highest proportion of responses were from the education sector (18%) and the health sector (14%) A full breakdown of responses by sector is below.63. While all responses have been considered carefully, we have not attempted to include in this document every point raised by respondents.64. Unless otherwise stated, the percentages reported are based on the number of people responding to each question, rather than the number of people responding to the consultation as a whole. Percentages have been rounded to the nearest whole number.65. The consultation adheres to the consultation principles issued by the Cabinet Office in July 2012 and updated in January 2016.66. Questions 1–3 asked for information about each respondent (whether an individual or an organisation, name of organisation and sector). These three questions were introduced to the online survey response tool after the consultation had been launched. In effect, this meant that the first 47 online respondents did not address these questions. Looking across all the questions, the main categories of respondent were from the education, health and local authority sectors. To avoid repetition, we have not provided separate breakdowns by sector for every question.4  References at annex C.13
Questions 1–3 Information about each respondent:CategoryNumber of respondentsPercentageUnspecified27235%Education sector13718%Health sector11114%Local authority services699%A member of the public517%Voluntary sector304%Children's social care274%Other233%Early years sector162%Criminal justice sector111%Policing111%Adult social care71%Fire service3<1%Total responses:768100%67. Questions 4–20 related to the issues discussed in the consultation paper. We have not been able to report on two of those questions: question 17 which asked where accountability should rest for any new statutory measure, and question 18 which asked what type of sanction there should be for any new statutory measure. This is because some respondents chose more than one of the options provided, which made it impossible to categorise the responses to this question accurately.68. This section sets out an analysis of the responses we received.14
Current child protection system69. The consultation paper set out how the current child protection system operates and sought views about where the main issues with the current system lie.Question 4: To what extent do you agree or disagree with the following statements about the current child protection system?   1. Child protection training for practitioners should be improved so thatthey are better qualified and able to provide the right help at the right time to keep children safe
2. More needs to be done within the child protection system to encourage new andinnovative systems to better protect children3. Organisations with child protection responsibilities need to work bettertogether4. Practitioners and organisations with child protection responsibilitiessometimes recklessly fail to take proper action (including reporting) to stop or prevent child abuse and neglect
Strongly Agree  AgreeNeither agree nor disagreeDisagree     Strongly Disagree  Don't know
 5. Child abuse and neglect is generally underreported by practitioners involved inchildren’s lives0%	20%	40%	60%	80%	100%ResponseQ 4.1Q 4.2Q 4.3Q 4.4Q 4.5Strongly agree31146%30344%37455%8312%7010%Agree23935%28041%26038%16224%12518%Neither agree nor disagree8512%7110%375%13921%16524%Disagree426%233%81%14822%20731%Strongly disagree41%1<1%00%11217%6810%Don’t know2<1%61%2<1%304%426%Total responses:683100%684100%681100%674100%677100%70. Some clear views were identified by respondents who answered this question. 93% agreed with the statement that organisations with child protection responsibilities need to work better together. 85% agreed with the statement that more needs to be done to encourage new and innovative systems to better protect children and 81% agreed with the statement that there needs to be better training for practitioners.71. More respondents (41%) disagreed with the statement that child abuse and neglect are generally under-reported by practitioners, than those who agreed with it (28%). A greater number of respondents (39%) also disagreed with the statement that practitioners and organisations with child protection responsibilities sometimes recklessly fail to take proper action (including reporting) to stop or prevent child abuse or neglect, than those who agreed with it (36%).15
Other measures that could be introducedMandatory Reporting72. The consultation paper sought views on the possible introduction of a statutory mandatory reporting duty, which would require specified practitioners or organisations to report child abuse or neglect if they knew or had reasonable cause to suspect it was taking place, with sanctions for failure to report. The consultation paper provided information on how mandatory reporting operates in other countries and how a system might be implemented in England. Respondents were asked for their views on a series of statements about the benefits and risks of mandatory reporting.Question 5: To what extent do you agree or disagree with the following statements?1. Mandatory reporting will generate more reports of suspected and known cases of child abuse and neglect2. Increased reporting may divert attention from the most serious child abuse and neglect cases
3. Increased reporting could mean that abuse and neglect would be captured at an early point in a child’s life4. Mandatory reporting could have an adverse impact on the child protection system (eg impacting recruitment and retention of staff,creating a culture of reporting rather than acting, negatively impacting the serious case review process)5. Mandatory reporting could dissuade victims from disclosing incidents of abuse and reduce ‘safe spaces’ for children6. Mandatory reporting could lead to greater prevention and awareness of abuse and neglect
Strongly AgreeAgreeNeither agree nor disagreeDisagreeStrongly Disagree
7. The introduction of a mandatory reporting duty would not in itself mean that appropriate action would be taken to protectchildren
Don't know
 8. Mandatory reporting duty would ensure that those best placed to make judgements about whether abuse or neglect is happening– ie social workers – do so0%	20%	40%	60%	80%	100%ResponseQ 5.1Q 5.2Q 5.3Q 5.4Q 5.5Q 5.6Q 5.7Q 5.8Strongly Agree18327%19528%12218%24736%15823%11417%27841%8713%Agree29643%25938%29043%22232%21131%21332%30144%18227%Neither agree nor disagree10515%8212%14521%7811%12418%15423%538%13019%Disagree6810%11016%9214%9314%14221%14021%335%18227%Strongly Disagree213%294%183%294%315%426%91%8212%Don’t know91%112%142%162%142%122%91%122%Total responses:682100%686100%681100%685100%680100%675100%683100%675100%16
73. A majority of respondents who answered this question agreed with the statement that mandatory reporting would generate more reports of suspected and known cases of child abuse and neglect (70%), and 61% agreed with the statement that increased reporting could mean that abuse and neglect would be captured at an early point in a child’s life. 40% agreed with the statement that mandatory reporting would ensure that those best placed to make judgements about whether abuse or neglect is happening do so, and 39% disagreed.74. Significant concerns were identified about a mandatory reporting duty. 66% agreed with the statement that increased reporting might divert attention from the most serious child abuse and neglect cases and 54% agreed with the statement that mandatory reporting could dissuade victims from disclosing incidents of abuse and reduce ‘safe spaces’ for children. 49% agreed with the statement that mandatory reporting could lead to greater prevention and awareness of abuse and neglect, and 27% disagreed.75. 68% agreed with the statement that mandatory reporting could have an adverse impact on the child protection system. 85% agreed with the statement that mandatory reporting would not in itself mean that appropriate action would be taken to protect children.76. These concerns were reflected in answers to the next question, which asked respondents the extent to which they thought mandatory reporting would improve outcomes for children.Question 6: To what extent do you agree that the introduction of a mandatory reporting duty would directly improve outcomes for children?ResponseNumber of respondentsPercentageStrongly Agree8413%Agree14622%Neither agree nor disagree13120%Disagree18328%Strongly Disagree10917%Total responses:653100%77. While 35% of respondents agreed that mandatory reporting would directly improve outcomes for children, there was a larger proportion (45%) who disagreed. Respondents were then invited to outline any other benefits, risks or issues in relation to mandatory reporting which had not been identified in the consultation paper.17
Question 7: Please outline any risks or benefits regarding the introduction of a mandatory reporting duty that haven’t been articulated in the consultation.Key wordNumber of responsesPercentageRisksOver reporting17541%Resource pressures12329%Detract from taking action7517%Staff Morale5513%Reduced disclosure from victims and abusers5312%Increased training burden297%Would require culture change297%Deter offenders from seeking help174%BenefitsIncreased reporting348%Increased confidence153%Better training113%Better protection for professionals92%Increase resources72%Other6214%Not Relevant153%Thresholds would need to be clear102%Better information sharing needed51%Single reporting system needed31%Table note.Responses to this open question have been coded using content analysis and grouped into broad themes. There were 429 respondents to this question. Percentages are calculated by dividing the response count for each code by the number of respondents (429) and will not add up to 100%.78. The main benefit of mandatory reporting identified by respondents to this question was an increased level of reporting (8%).79. Respondents identified over-reporting as the main risk (41%), suggesting that mandatory reporting could overwhelm the child protection system. Connected to this, respondents were also concerned about the increased pressure on resources (29%). Another main risk identified was that a focus on reporting would replace the need for professionals to take effective action (17%).80. The views expressed in written submissions followed a similar pattern: increased reporting was seen as the biggest benefit, while the main risks were over-reporting, increased pressure on resources and concerns that a focus on reporting would detract from taking effective action.81. A number of written responses also suggested particular specific forms of mandatory reporting (in ‘closed institutions’ or ‘regulated activities’), as noted in the summary of responses and main findings section. Some respondents to the consultation proposed an alternative definition of ‘regulated activities’ to the one outlined in the consultation materials, with an expanded and more detailed list of activities within scope.18
Duty to act82. The consultation sought views on the possible introduction of a statutory duty to act. The introduction of a duty to act would impose a legal requirement on specified groups, professionals or organisations to take appropriate action where they knew or suspected that a child was suffering, or was at risk of suffering, abuse or neglect. This option was developed following consideration of an extension of the existing wilful neglect offences, which currently apply in relation to healthcare and adult social care, to child abuse and neglect.83. Respondents were asked for their views on a series of statements about the benefits and risks of introducing a duty to act.Question 8: To what extent do you agree or disagree with the following statements?
1. A duty to act could strengthen accountability on individuals andorganisations in protecting children from abuse and neglect 2. A duty to act could have an adverse impact on the child protection system (egimpacting recruitment and retention of staff, and negatively impacting the serious case review process)3. A duty to act on child abuse and neglect would likely lead to better outcomes for children than a dutyfocused solely on the reporting of child abuse and neglect  4. A duty to act allows professionals discretion to decide what action should be taken to best protect children in eachcase5. The focus of sanctions for the duty to act on wilful, deliberate or recklessfailures would ensure that those responsible for the very worst failures in care would be held accountable
0%	50%	100%
Strongly Agree AgreeNeither agree nor disagree DisagreeStrongly Disagree Don't know
ResponseQ 8.1Q 8.2Q 8.3Q 8.4Q 8.5Strongly Agree16024%14121%13720%9714%11417%Agree29343%20530%25738%27340%25939%Neither agree nor disagree9414%13219%14622%13520%12418%Disagree8813%14722%8312%10716%9714%Strongly Disagree426%355%416%578%619%Don’t know3<1%233%142%122%173%Total responses:680100%683100%678100%681100%672100%84. 58% of respondents who answered this question agreed with the statement that a duty to act would likely lead to better outcomes for children than a duty focussed solely on the reporting of child abuse and neglect. A majority of respondents (54%) also agreed that a duty to act would allow professionals discretion to decide what action should be taken to best protect children in each case. Most of the respondents (56%) agreed that the focus of sanctions for breach of the duty to act on wilful, deliberate or reckless failures would ensure that those responsible for the very worst failures would be held accountable. The strongest result was in relation to accountability, where two thirds of respondents (67%) agreed that a duty to act19
could strengthen the accountability on individuals and organisations in protecting children from abuse and neglect.85. Less positively, 51% of respondents agreed with the statement that a duty to act could have an adverse impact on the child protection system (e.g., by impacting the recruitment and retention of staff, and negatively impacting the serious case review process).86. Respondents were then asked the extent to which they thought a duty to act would improve outcomes for children.Question 9: To what extent do you agree that the introduction of a duty to act would directly improve outcomes for children?ResponseNumber of respondentsPercentageStrongly Agree11317%Agree21332%Neither agree nor disagree14722%Disagree10416%Strongly Disagree8112%Total responses:658100%87. Of those respondents who answered this question, nearly half (49%) agreed with the statement that a duty to act would directly improve outcomes for children. 28% of respondents disagreed and 22% neither agreed nor disagreed.88. Respondents were invited to outline any other benefits, risks and issues in relation to a duty to act which had not been identified in the consultation paper.Question 10: Please outline any risks or benefits regarding the introduction of a duty to act that haven’t been articulated in the consultation.Key wordNumber of responsesPercentageRisksComplicated judgements involved7223%Resource pressures6821%Fear of being reported for not acting5216%Impact on staff morale4213%Poor management of children’s social care186%Timing of intervention important155%Increased intrusion into families62%Risk from duty being discretionary41%BenefitsProcesses would be safer and more robust258%Improved professional standards165%Other5517%Not relevant196%Training/guidance113%Definitions and clarifications of thresholds needed93%Table note.Base: 318 responses to this question. Note: percentages are calculated by dividing the response count for each code by the number of respondents (318) and will not add up to 100%.20
89. Respondents suggested that the main benefit of a duty to act would be safer, more robust processes (8%).90. The main additional risks identified by respondents were that a duty to act would not recognise the complicated judgements required by practitioners (23%) and that it would increase pressure on resources (21%).91. The written submissions we received identified the main benefits as improved professional standards as well as safer, more robust processes. The main risks were that a duty to act would not recognise the complicated judgements required by practitioners and a fear of being reported for not acting.Respondents’ preferred approach92. Having considered all the issues and previous questions, respondents were asked to express a preference between the three approaches set out in the consultation:ï allow the ongoing package of reform to be implemented before considering the introduction of additional statutory measures;ï introduction of a mandatory reporting duty; orï introduction of a duty to act.Question 11: Having considered the issues outlined in the consultation and your answers above, which of the following would be most preferable?Response  Number of respondentsPercentageAllowing the package of reform measures focused on improving how the whole system responds to child abuse and neglect to be implemented before considering the introduction of additional statutory measures45763%The introduction of a mandatory reporting duty focused on increasing the reporting of child abuse and neglect8512%The introduction of a duty to act, focused on taking appropriate action in relation to child abuse and neglect, with sanctions for deliberate and reckless failures18225%Total responses:724100%Table note.For this question only, responses to the online and offline survey have been combined with the written submissions to provide an overall picture to the main question.93. Responses to this question produced a clear majority of 63% of respondents preferring the option of allowing the existing Government reform programme time to be implemented before considering additional statutory measures of the type outlined in the consultation. Of respondents who provided information about their professional sector, the largest categories of responder supporting this option were from the education, health and local authority sectors.94. Just over a quarter of respondents (25%) preferred the introduction of a duty to act. The largest categories of responder supporting this option were from the education sector, members of the public and the health sector.95. Only 12% of respondents supported the introduction of mandatory reporting. The largest categories of responder preferring this option were from the education sector, health sector and members of the public.21
Scope, accountability and sanctions96. The consultation considered issues relating to the scope, accountability and sanctions which would apply to either mandatory reporting or a duty to act, in the event that one of them was introduced.97. Respondents were asked for views on a range of issues relating to aspects of child abuse and neglect that a new duty might cover.Question 12: If a new statutory measure is introduced, do you agree with the following elements of the proposed scope?98. A clear majority of respondents who answered this question (68%) agreed that any new statutory duty should apply to all forms of child abuse and neglect (including online abuse and grooming), 71% disagreed that a new duty should apply to children under 18 only and 68% disagreed that it should apply to present day abuse and neglect only. 65% disagreed that it should apply to abuse and neglect encountered during the course of a practitioner’s day to day role only.99. Views were more balanced in respect of the remaining statements. 54% agreed that any new duty should apply to both suspected and known child abuse and neglect; 57% agreed that a new duty should apply to abuse or neglect within the home and within organisations or institutions (e.g. boarding schools); and 58% agreed that it should be triggered if a practitioner had ‘reasonable cause to suspect’ a child was being abused or neglected, or was likely to be abused or neglected.100. The consultation then invited respondents to provide any further information on the proposed scope of the duties.22
Question 13: Are there aspects of the proposed scope that you disagree with, or you would like to provide further information to support your answer to question 12?Key wordCountPercentageToo wideMeasures won’t be effective/detract from actions168%Suspected abuse too broad168%Clearer definition/scope needed126%Don’t include all vulnerable adults/all roles74%Existing legal framework/arrangements satisfactory63%Will affect morale/deter practitioners42%Not historic abuse42%Limit to when professionals are on duty11%Not wide enoughWider age range2815%Should cover historic abuse168%Extend to wider age range/care leavers/other roles126%Apply to all professions with frequent contact with children126%Extend to other abuse/risks63%Wider time scope53%Apply to youth organisations42%Should apply to all staff within an organisation covered by duty42%Apply to religious institutions21%Not relevant3820%Other147%Need better information sharing/record keeping32%Table note.Base: 192 total respondents. Percentages are calculated by dividing the response count for each code by the number of respondents(192) and will not add up to 100%.101. Responses to this question were split on whether the suggested scope of a new duty was too wide or not wide enough. 8% commented that it should not cover suspicion of abuse or neglect, feeling that evidence would be needed. Of those respondents who felt that the suggested scope was not wide enough, 15% thought that a new duty should cover a wider age range than just children aged under 18 and 8% felt it should cover historic abuse.102. The main themes from the written submissions we received were that the scope of any new duty should not extend to adults but that any new duty should cover all professions.103. Where respondents felt that any new statutory measure should extend to adults, they were invited to provide further information, taking into account the existing wilful neglect offence.Question 14: If you believe new statutory measures should extend to adults, please provide further information, taking into account the existing wilful neglect offence.Key wordNumber of responsesPercentageVulnerable adults10047%0–25 disabled/SEN3014%Should not apply to adults2210%All vulnerable groups2210%Not relevant188%Other84%More research/consideration needed73%23
Key wordNumber of responsesPercentageHistoric adult reports63%Other forms of abuse63%Extend wilful neglect31%In care31%Care leavers31%Table note.Base: 213 respondents for this question. Percentages are calculated by dividing the response count for each code by the number of respondents (213) and will not add up to 100%.104. Nearly half of respondents who answered this question (47%) felt that any new duty should cover vulnerable adults as well as children and 10% of respondents felt it should extend to all vulnerable groups. 14% thought it should cover children and young people aged 0–25 who have special educational needs or disabilities.105. The consultation paper suggested that any new duty should apply to all practitioners or organisations who undertake activities which bring them into close and frequent contact with children because they are well placed to recognise risk factors, triggers of concern and signs of abuse or neglect. The consultation paper sought respondents’ views on whether these activities or others should be included if a new statutory duty were to be introduced.Question 15: Should the proposed activities outlined in the consultation be included if a new statutory measure were to be introduced?100%
80%60%
 Yes  No
40%20%0%Yes	No106. A clear majority of respondents to this question (79%) agreed that any new duty should apply to the activities set out in the consultation paper.107. The consultation paper went on to invite further views on what activities should be covered by any new duty.24
Question 16: Please provide your views, noting if any activities listed should be removed, and if there any other activities that should be included.Key wordNumber of responsesPercentageAddSafeguarding3422%Voluntary3321%Religious3019%All school staff117%Play areas96%Sports clubs75%Youth groups/youth workers53%Scouts/guides/brownies32%Managers11%ExcludeAdmin/support roles85%Other4026%Not relevant2114%Table note.Base: 154 respondents to this question. Percentages are calculated by dividing the response count for each code by the number of respondents (154) and will not add up to 100%.108. There was a wide range of suggestions in response to this question but those with the largest support were to add safeguarding roles (22%), the voluntary sector (21%) and religious institutions (19%).109. Respondents were invited to provide any further information about the reasons for their answers to the above questions on scope, accountability and sanctions.Question 19: Please provide further information about the reasons for your answers to the above questions on scope, accountability and sanctions, if you would like to do so.Key wordNumber of responsesPercentageMore severeCriminal sanctions2913%DBS review167%Apply to public94%Publically accountable83%General support for sanctions21%Less severeNot too severe3917%Not criminal3616%Organisation level3113%Professional body219%Blames/criminalises staff for actions beyond their control125%Not DBS94%Sanctions are sufficient in current system42%Sanctions should be proportional31%General against sanctions21%Not relevant3716%Organisations should be accountable not individuals73%Other52%Table note.Base: 231 respondents. Percentages are calculated by dividing the response count for each code by the number of respondents (231) and will not add up to 100%.25
110. This question produced a wide range of views, although overall a majority of respondents felt that sanctions should be less severe. 16% of respondents felt that sanctions should not be criminal, compared with 13% who felt they should be. 17% of respondents made a general comment that sanctions should not be too severe and 13% made a general comment that sanctions should be applied at organisation level.111. The most frequently expressed view from the written submissions we received was that sanctions should not be criminal (although a number of submissions did support criminal sanctions) and should be left to professional bodies.Additional information112. Finally, the consultation invited respondents to provide any additional information that they felt should be taken into account, including but not limited to:ï the operational impact of introducing a new statutory measure, including on small businesses such as nurseries or children’s homes;ï how the new duty should interact with the existing FGM mandatory reporting model;ï any additional research/evidence not referred to in the consultation document; andï the operational impact of extending either of the statutory measures to vulnerable adults.Key wordNumber of responsesPercentageResources/burden5724%General negatives4017%Definition3314%General benefits3214%FGM reporting3013%Existing framework2310%Morale188%Other136%Research136%Confidentiality104%Not relevant63%Duties should extend to adults63%Timing52%Thresholds should be reconsidered/more training on thresholds52%Information sharing should be improved52%Listen to children/reporters more42%Duties will burden31%Duties should apply to small organisations/businesses21%Creates blame culture towards professionals21%Duties should apply to all staff in safeguarding sector21%Table note.Base: 236 respondents. Percentages are calculated by dividing the response count for each code by the number of respondents (236) and will not add up to 100%.113. There was a wide range of comments in response to this question. 24% of respondents took the opportunity to highlight the impact of any new duty on resources, 14% highlighted the importance of having clear definitions to support a new duty and 13% commented on how a new duty should interact with the existing FGM mandatory reporting model.26
114. The main theme from written submissions was that the existing controls should be improved instead of introducing a statutory duty. A number of submissions also highlighted the need for clear definitions and others felt that further research was needed into the issues around reporting and acting on child abuse and neglect.27
Annex A – The consultation analysis process1. Consultation responses were analysed by officials at the Home Office and Department for Education.2. While it was clear that respondents using the consultation proforma or answering specific questions were replying to the consultation, a view also had to be taken on what other correspondence constituted a formal response. It was decided to consider all letters or emails received during the consultation and include them, so long as they mentioned the consultation or one of the policies within it and gave a view.3. Data from responses to the quantitative (closed) questions in the consultation (e.g., those that invited ‘yes’, ‘no’, ‘don’t know’ responses) was inputted and analysed. All qualitative responses (those responses to open questions or where a respondent had written a paper, letter or email rather than answering specific questions) were also logged and analysed. This was done by coding the responses to identify frequently occurring themes. Where respondents commented on a different aspect of the policy which they were being asked about, this too was recorded. Findings have been reported in this document.4. A number of in-depth annexes to consultation responses were also received, covering areas such as evidence, data and legal opinions. These were not coded but have been considered by officials and fed into the Government’s response.5. While the consultation was open for anyone to respond, it should be noted that those who responded were self-selected and therefore the responses received cannot be considered representative of the views of the public or different sectors in general.6. The numbers of responses reported in this analysis are actual numbers and have not been weighted. It should also be remembered that not all respondents answered every question. Some responded directly to the questions, some answered only parts of questions, and others commented more broadly on the overall content of the consultation.28
Annex B – List of organisations that respondedAbbeyfields NurseryAction for ChildrenAction on Elder AbuseAge UKAssociation Directors Adult Social ServicesAssociation for Sexual Abuse PreventionAssociation of Child PsychotherapistsAssociation of CollegesAssociation of Directors of Children’s ServicesAssociation of Independent LSCB ChairsAssociation of London Directors of Children’s ServicesAssociation of Personal Injury LawyersAssociation of Professors of Social WorkAssociation of School and College LeadersAssociation of Teachers and LecturersBarham Primary SchoolBarnadosBarry Primary SchoolBedfordshire Safeguarding TeamBerkshire Healthcare NHS foundation TrustBirmingham City CouncilBishops' CofE and RC Primary SchoolBlackpool CouncilBlossom House SchoolBoarding Schools' AssociationBolt Burden Kemp (Solicitors)Bolton CouncilBolton Safeguarding Children BoardBoost Child and Youth Advocacy CentreBournemouth Borough CouncilBracknell Forest CouncilBradford District CareBreckland District CouncilBristol Community HealthBristol Law SchoolBritish Association Counselling and PsychotherapyBritish Association for the Study and Prevention of Child Abuse and NeglectBritish Association of Social Workers (England)British Medical AssociationBritish Pregnancy Advisory ServiceBritish Psychoanalytic CouncilBritish Psychological SocietyBromfords School and sixth Form CollegeCambian EducationCambridge Fire & Rescue ServiceCambridgeshire County Council, Adult Safeguarding TeamCanterbury DioceseCarolyn Eyre LtdCastle School29
Central Bedfordshire Safeguarding Children BoardCentre of Excellence for Information SharingCheshire East CouncilChief Nursing Officer's Black & Minority Ethnic Advisory GroupChildren's Commissioner's OfficeChildren's Services Operations Central Bedfordshire CouncilChildren's Services Peterborough City CouncilChorley District CouncilChurch Safeguarding ConsultancyChurches' Child Protection Advisory ServiceCIS'tersColegate Community Primary SchoolCoram CampusCornwall CouncilCrackley Bank Primary SchoolCYPNAUKDenbigh High SchoolDerbyshire County CouncilDevon County CouncilDevon Fire & RescueDoddinghurst Infant SchoolDoncaster Safeguarding Children BoardDukesgate AcademyDurham County CouncilElaine Hook Education ConsultancyEnd Violence Against WomenEnfield CouncilEnough Abuse UKEssex County CouncilFaculty of Sexual and Reproductive HealthcareFairhouse Primary School, EssexFamily Education TrustFamily Justice CouncilFamily Operations Leadership Team, Essex County CouncilFamily Rights GroupFlagg Nursery SchoolFord End C.o.E Primary SchoolFoundation for Women’s Health Research and Development (FORWARD)Freedom and Autonomy for Schools national Organisation (FASNA)Gateshead Behaviour Support ServiceGateshead CouncilGateshead EducationGateshead Local Safeguarding Children BoardGeneral Medical CouncilGeneral Pharmaceutical CouncilGirlguidingGloucestershire County CouncilGloucestershire Safeguarding Children BoardGodolphin and Latymer SchoolGrange primary schoolGreat Ellingham and Rocklands Schools FederationGreat Ormond Street Hospital for Children NHS TrustGreat Tey Primary School30
Hampshire ConstabularyHampshire SafeguardingHappy Days Nurseries LtdHappy Hours Pre SchoolHarlowbury Primary SchoolHarrow Early YearsHealth & Care Professions CouncilHolmes Chapel Comprehensive School and Sixth Form CollegeHolyport CollegeHomerton University Hospital NHS Foundation TrustHugh James (Solicitors)Independent Schools CouncilInformation Commissioners OfficeIsebrook SEN CollegeIslington CCGIslington Safeguarding Children BoardJoint Nottinghamshire Health Community Safeguarding Partnership GroupKent County CouncilKIdscapeKing Henry VIII SchoolLabour PartyLancashire Fire & Rescue ServiceLancashire SafeguardingLaw SocietyLeeds City CouncilLeicester City CouncilLeicester LSCBLimes Community & Children's CentreLiverpool City Region Combined AuthorityLocal Government AssociationLodge surgery ChippenhamLondon Ambulance Service NHS TrustLondon Borough of BexleyLondon Borough of CamdenLondon Borough of HackneyLondon Borough of Hammersmith & FulhamLondon Borough of HounslowLondon Borough of MertonLondon Borough of Waltham ForestLondon Criminal Courts Solicitors' AssociationLondon Evelina Community speech and language therapy serviceLondon Fire BrigadeLoudoun TrustLPCCALuton Borough Council, Children & Learning DepartmentLuton Clinical Commissioning Group (NHS)Luton Safeguarding ChildrenManchester Community AcademyManchester Safeguarding Children Board (MSCB)Mandate NowMargaret McMillan Nursery SchoolMatlock Pre-SchoolMedical Defence Union31
Medway, Dartford Gravesham and Swanley and Swale CCGMedway CouncilMencapMiddlesbrough CouncilMilton Keynes Safeguarding Children Board and Safeguarding Adult BoardMissing PeopleMOSACMount View Pre-SchoolMyton SchoolNAHTNAPACNASSNASUWTNational Ambulance Safeguarding Group (NASG)National Children's BureauNational Council of Women on Great BritainNational Day Nurseries AssociationNational Deaf Children's SocietyNational Organisation for the Treatment of AbusersNational Union of TeachersNELFT North East London Foundation TrustNew Beacon SchoolNewcastle Gateshead CCGNHS BlackburnNHS CroydonNHS EnglandNHS England SouthNHS London (C&NW)NHS Nene and NHS Corby Clinical Commissioning GroupNHS Northumberland Clinical Commissioning GroupNorfolk & Norwich University HospitalNorfolk and Norwich University HospitalNorfolk and Waveney CCGNorth Yorkshire County CouncilNorth Yorkshire Fire and Rescue ServiceNorthamptonshire County CouncilNorthgate School Arts CollegeNorthumberland County CouncilNottingham City CouncilNottinghamshire County CouncilNSPCCNursing & Midwifery CouncilOffice of the Police and Crime CommissionerOfstedOPCC CumbriaOxford Health NHS Foundation TrustOxfordshire County CouncilOxfordshire Safeguarding Children BoardPadfield Community Primary SchoolPaternoster School, CirencesterPCC Avon & SomersetPCC Devon and CornwallPCC Dorset32
PCC EssexPCC LeicestershirePCC North WalesPCC North YorkshirePCC NorthumbriaPCC South YorkshirePea Pods Day NurseryPeterborough City CouncilPlymouth City councilPlymouth Young SafeguardersPolice Superintendent Association England and WalesPositive Resolutions WirralPowers Hall AcademyPre-school Learning AllianceProfessional Association Childcare and Early YearsPulham Primary SchoolQuality Improvement and Support Team – Calderdale MBCQueen Victoria Hospital Foundation TrustRape Crisis (England & Wales)Redcar and Cleveland Safeguarding Children BoardRedditch and Bromsgrove CCG, South Worcestershire CCG, Wyre Forest CCGRochdale Borough Council Children's ServicesRochdale Borough Safeguarding Children BoardRotherham CC/ Yorkshire & Humber Social Work NetworkRotherham NHS Foundation TrustRoyal Berkshire Fire & Rescue ServiceRoyal Borough of Kensington and ChelseaRoyal Borough of Kingston upon ThamesRoyal College of NursingRoyal College of Obstetricians and GynaecologistsRoyal College of Paediatrics and Child HealthRoyal College of PsychiatristsRoyal Pharmaceutical SocietySafeguarding Children Professionals across North Yorkshire and YorkSafer Activities for Everyone CICSafer Safeguarding GroupSalisbury Medical PracticeSamaritansSandal Castle VA Community Primary SchoolScout AssociationSHE UK & MENding UKSheffield City CouncilShenfield High SchoolShropshire Partners in CareShropshire Safeguarding AdultsSimpson Millar (Solicitors)Slater and Gordon LawyersSolihull Children's Social WorkSomerset Partnership NHS FoundationSouth Holland District CouncilSouth Yorkshire Fire & Rescue ServiceSparken Hill AcademySt Ethelbert’s Catholic Primary School33
St Mary's CE JuniorSt Pauls Stars Breakfast and After School ClubSt. Anne's Catholic High School for GirlsSt. Oswald’s CoE Infant SchoolSteps Community NurseryStopSexualOffendingStubbin Wood SchoolSuffolk County CouncilSuffolk Local Safeguarding Children BoardSunderland Safeguarding Children BoardSurrey County CouncilSwindon Borough CouncilSwindon CollegeTavistock and Portman NHS TrustTelford and Wrekin HousingTemple GrafThe Children's SocietyThe Interlink FoundationThe Oval SchoolThe Survivors TrustThe Victoria Climbié Foundation UKTheydon Bois Primary SchoolThree TowersThrockley Primary SchoolToftwood Infant SchoolTogether TrustTransformation PowerhouseTudor Park Education TrustUK Council for PsychotherapyUniversity Hospitals Bristol NHS Foundation TrustUniversity of Central LancashireVictim Commissioner's OfficeVirtuous PaedophilesVoice: the union for education professionalsWarwickshire Office of the Police and Crime CommissionerWarwickshire SafeguardingWest Midlands PoliceWestminster City CouncilWhite Bridge Primary SchoolWilliam Gregg V.C Leisure Centre Places for PeopleWiltshire CouncilWorcestershire County CouncilWorcestershire Safeguarding AdultsWycombe District CouncilYour Homes NewcastleYouth Justice Board34
Annex C – Additional research submittedMathews, B., Lee, X., & Norman, R. (2016). Impact of a new mandatory reporting law on reporting and identification of child sexual abuse: a seven-year time trend analysis.Bilson, A., & Martin, K. E. (2016). Referrals and Child Protection in England: One in Five Children Referred to Children’s Services and One in Nineteen Investigated before the Age of Five. British Journal of Social Work, bcw054.Bilson, A., Featherstone, B., & Martin, K. E. (In press) How child protection’s ‘investigative turn’ impacts on poor and deprived communities Family Law.Harries, M., Cant, R. L., Bilson, A., & Thorpe, D. (2015). Responding to information about children in adversity: Ten years of a differential response model in Western Australia. Child abuse & neglect, 39, 61–72.Bilson A., Harries, M., Cant, R. L. & Thorpe, D. (submitted for publication) Accounting for the Increase of Children in Care in Western Australia: What can Client Information Systems Tell Us? Child Abuse and Neglect.35
Home  Crime, justice and the law  Your rights and legal supportRequest CCTV footage of yourself
You have the right to request CCTV footage of yourself.You need to make a request to the owner of the CCTV system. You can do this either in writing or verbally.The owner’s details are usually written on a sign attached to the camera, unless the owner is obvious (like a shop).Tell them you’re requesting information held about you under data protection law. The Information Commissioner’s O?ce (ICO) has guidance about getting copies of your personal data.Provide information to help the owner identify you, for example:  a specific date and time proof of your identity a description of yourselfThe CCTV owner must usually provide the footage free of charge within 1 calendar month.    Most CCTV footage is deleted 30 days after it’s recorded.The CCTV owner might not be allowed to share any footage if:  other people can be seen in it  they’re not able to edit out people to protect their identityThe CCTV owner can invite you to a viewing of the footage if:  they’re unable to provide you with the footage itself you agree to that arrangementThey can refuse your request if sharing the footage could put an ongoing criminal investigation at risk.The ICO has guidance about requesting footage:  from home CCTV systems relating to a crime
Related contentBeing monitored at work: workers' rights Data protectionContact your council about crime prevention and community safety
Explore the topicYour rights and legal supportServices and informationGovernment activityBenefitsEducation and learningDepartmentsBirths, death, marriages and careEmploying peopleNewsBusiness and self-employedEnvironment and countrysideGuidance and regulationChildcare and parentingHousing and local servicesResearch and statisticsCitizenship and living in the UKMoney and taxPolicy papers and consultationsCrime, justice and the lawPassports, travel and living abroadTransparencyDisabled peopleVisas and immigrationHow government worksDriving and transportWorking, jobs and pensionsGet involved
Home  Housing and local services  Noise, neighbours, pets and pestsResolving neighbour disputes
Contact your neighbour's landlordIf your neighbour is a tenant, you can complain to their landlord. This could be a housing association, the council or a private landlord.	PreviousTalk to your neighbour	NextUse a mediation service
Related contentContact the policeHow to report antisocial behaviour Report a noise nuisance to your council Controlling y our dog in publicYour property boundaries A guide to civil mediation
View a printable version of the whole guideExplore the topicYour rights and legal support Noise, neighbours, pets and pestsServices and informationGovernment activityBenefitsEducation and learningDepartmentsBirths, death, marriages and careEmploying peopleNewsBusiness and self-employedEnvironment and countrysideGuidance and regulationChildcare and parentingHousing and local servicesResearch and statisticsCitizenship and living in the UKMoney and taxPolicy papers and consultationsCrime, justice and the lawPassports, travel and living abroadTransparencyDisabled peopleVisas and immigrationHow government worksDriving and transportWorking, jobs and pensionsGet involved
Home  Housing and local services  Noise, neig hbours, pets and pestsResolving neighbour disputes
High hedges, trees and boundariesYou must try to settle a dispute about a high hedg e informally before the council can intervene.Ask your council for a complaint form if the hedge is all of these: 2 or more mostly evergreen or semi-evergreen trees or shrubs  over 2 metres tall a?ecting your enjoyment of your home or garden because it’s too tall You might have to pay the council a fee to consider your complaint.Read more about complaining to your council about a high hedge.When you can trim hedges or treesYou can trim branches or roots that cross into your property from a neighbour’s property or a public road.You can only trim up to the property boundary. If you do more than this, your neighbour could take you to court for damaging their property.If you live in a conservation area, or the trees in the hedge are protected by a ‘tree preservation order’, you might need y our council’s permission to trim them.If your property borders a roadThe highways authority can ask you to cut back hedges or trees on your property if they’re causing an obstruction in the road. If you refuse, they can go into your property without your permission to do the work themselves. They may charge you for this.Property damage from hedgesYour neighbour is responsible for maintaining their hedges so they do not, for example, damage your property or grow too high. If they do damage your property, your neighbour may be liable.Boundaries and shared (‘party’) wallsDisputes about what is the exact boundary between 2 properties can be di?cult to solve so get legal advice.You must give notice to your neighbour if you are going to do work on a shared (‘party’) wall.The Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors (RICS) has free advice on boundary disputes and party walls (the walls you share with your neighbours).
Related contentContact the policeHow to report antisocial behaviour Report a noise nuisance to your council Controlling y our dog in publicYour property boundaries A guide to civil mediation
 PreviousComplain about noise to the council NextCall the policeView a printable version of the whole guideExplore the topicYour rights and legal support Noise, neighbours, pets and pestsServices and informationGovernment activityBenefitsEducation and learningDepartmentsBirths, death, marriages and careEmploying peopleNewsBusiness and self-employedEnvironment and countrysideGuidance and regulationChildcare and parentingHousing and local servicesResearch and statisticsCitizenship and living in the UKMoney and taxPolicy papers and consultationsCrime, justice and the lawPassports, travel and living abroadTransparencyDisabled peopleVisas and immigrationHow government worksDriving and transportWorking , jobs and pensionsGet involved
Home  Housing and local services  Noise, neighbours, pets and pestsResolving neighbour disputes
OverviewFollow these steps if you have a dispute with your neighbour.This guide is also available in Welsh (Cymraeg).Try to solve the problem informally by talking to them.
Related contentContact the policeHow to report antisocial behaviour Report a noise nuisance to your council Controlling y our dog in publicYour property boundaries A guide to civil mediation
If your neighbour is a tenant, you could contact their landlord.You could use a mediation service if raising the issue informally does not work.If the dispute involves a statutory nuisance (something like loud music or barking dogs), you can make a complaint to y our local council.Contact the police if your neighbour is breaking the law by being violent or harassing you.As a last resort you can take legal action throug h the courts. NextTalk to your neighbourView a printable version of the whole guideExplore the topicYour rights and legal support Noise, neighbours, pets and pestsServices and informationGovernment activityBenefitsEducation and learningDepartmentsBirths, death, marriages and careEmploying peopleNewsBusiness and self-employedEnvironment and countrysideGuidance and regulationChildcare and parentingHousing and local servicesResearch and statisticsCitizenship and living in the UKMoney and taxPolicy papers and consultationsCrime, justice and the lawPassports, travel and living abroadTransparencyDisabled peopleVisas and immigrationHow government worksDriving and transportWorking, jobs and pensionsGet involved
Home  Housing and local services  Noise, neighbours, pets and pestsResolving neighbour disputes
Take action through the courtsIf all else fails, you can take legal action against a neighbour.Taking someone to court can be expensive so it should be your last resort if nothing else works. There may be court fees and you may have to pay a solicitor.Legal adviceYou can get free legal advice from a law centre, advice centre or Citizens Advice.You can also find a lawyer who deals with a neighbour disputes.
Related contentContact the policeHow to report antisocial behaviour Report a noise nuisance to your council Controlling y our dog in publicYour property boundaries A guide to civil mediation
 PreviousCall the policeView a printable version of the whole guideExplore the topicYour rights and legal support Noise, neighbours, pets and pestsServices and informationGovernment activityBenefitsEducation and learningDepartmentsBirths, death, marriages and careEmploying peopleNewsBusiness and self-employedEnvironment and countrysideGuidance and regulationChildcare and parentingHousing and local servicesResearch and statisticsCitizenship and living in the UKMoney and taxPolicy papers and consultationsCrime, justice and the lawPassports, travel and living abroadTransparencyDisabled peopleVisas and immigrationHow government worksDriving and transportWorking, jobs and pensionsGet involved
Home  Housing and local services  Noise, neighbours, pets and pestsResolving neighbour disputes
Talk to your neighbourBefore making a formal complaint or getting others involved, try to discuss the problem with your neighbour.If you’re worried about approaching them, write a letter, explaining the problem clearly and sticking to the facts.If the problem a?ects other neighbours, involve them as well. It can be easier to settle a dispute if the complaint comes from a number of people.A tenants’ association might help if you’re a member of one.
Related contentContact the policeHow to report antisocial behaviour Report a noise nuisance to your council Controlling y our dog in publicYour property boundaries A guide to civil mediation
Get practical advice from Citizens Advice to deal with common neighbour disputes, like noise and rubbish. PreviousOverview NextContact your neighbour's landlordView a printable version of the whole guideExplore the topicYour rights and legal support Noise, neighbours, pets and pestsServices and informationGovernment activityBenefitsEducation and learningDepartmentsBirths, death, marriages and careEmploying peopleNewsBusiness and self-employedEnvironment and countrysideGuidance and regulationChildcare and parentingHousing and local servicesResearch and statisticsCitizenship and living in the UKMoney and taxPolicy papers and consultationsCrime, justice and the lawPassports, travel and living abroadTransparencyDisabled peopleVisas and immigrationHow government worksDriving and transportWorking, jobs and pensionsGet involved
24/03/2025  Risk assessmenthttps://www.college.police.uk/app/civil-emergencies/civil-contingencies/risk-assessment PageRisk assessmentThis page is from APP, the official source of professional practice for policing. First published23 October 2013 Updated3 April 2024Written by College of Policing Civil contingencies6 mins readBy their nature, emergencies and major incidents can be traumatic events for personnel involved directly or indirectly. Basic needs of personnel should not be neglected as this may affect the response. The strategic and tactical commanders should ensure appropriate arrangements are in place and identified individuals nominated to carry out these arrangements. Consideration should be given to appointing a health and safety adviser to assist in preparing appropriate health and safety risk assessments. Health and safety risk assessments should be recorded in writing.Understanding risk is central to emergency response. The willingness to make decisions in conditions of uncertainty is the first of ten principles of risk management.These principles and the joint decision model (JDM) encourage a positive approach to risk by supporting decision-makers and building their confidence in taking risks.The Code of Ethics defines standards of behaviour for everyone who works in policing and outlines the principles that should guide decision-making. Officers and staff should use these ethical principles and feel supported in ‘doing the right thing’ when facing decisions involving risk.Health and safety dutiesEmergency responders must ensure that their plans, assessments and major incident response facilitate the quick identification and management of hazards in all stages from initial report to recovery. For example, each emergency service has a responsibility to ensure that their personnel have the correct personal protective equipment (PPE) when entering the inner cordon and that they are given an adequate health and safety briefing.
In the event of major incidents, a wide range of physical, psychological and safety hazards may be faced by the public and emergency responders. All such hazards need to be managed to protect staff and the public from harm.Health and safety duties range from developing generic risk assessments for pre-planned operations to dynamic risk assessments in emergency situations.It is important to note that while working on joint risk assessment and a shared situational awareness, the responsibility for the health and safety of staff remains with each individual emergency response agency. This is coordinated through either the strategic commander or strategic coordination centre. There should be a two-way flow of information, support and advice between the emergency responders involved and the command structure to minimise risk of harm to staff – and ultimately, the public.The Health and Safety Executive (HSE) 2018 have published ‘Striking the balance between operational and health and safety duties in the Police Service.’Joint risk assessmentOne of the five JESIP principles is risk assessment. See JESIP guidance on joint risk assessment.Initial incident assessmentThe initial incident assessment forms part of a dynamic risk assessment (outlined in the JDM) and contributes to shared situational awareness. The initial incident assessment seeks to identify any immediate potential hazards to staff and public.No single emergency response agency can initially appreciate all relevant dimensions of an emergency situation. A conscious effort is required to share information, to reach a common understanding of risks and their implications. A joint understanding of risk, achieved through sharing information about threats and hazards, enables agencies to agree potential control measures.To identify all significant hazards and to set a safety strategy, the lead emergency responder should consider setting up an incident safety advisory cell.Incident safety advisory cellThe incident safety advisory cell should comprise relevant multi-agency operational practitioners, health, safety and medical professionals, and scientific advisers. The purpose of this group is to ensure the continuity of hazard identification and to manage risk control measures across agencies. Professional collaboration ensures the effective use of safety and health expertise and resources.The incident safety advisory cell should:  set the strategy for safety inform the tactical decision-making process, providing timely and consistent safety-critical strategy,information and instruction to all those affected or dealing with the incident implement the operational plan and support the development of safety options to support informed inter- agency operational decision-making
 coordinate an oversight of health and safety advice and support advise on the incident hazard profile, assess and monitor hazards and activity, and support the recovery and clean-up, including: hazard-profiling of the scene supporting the development of incident risk assessments and management of hazards, including safe systems of work provision of pragmatic safety advice for what can often be a dynamic changing scenario and environment post-event debriefing of staff and structured organisational learningGeneric risk assessmentForces are required to undertake documented risk assessments in accordance with the requirements of the Health and Safety at Work Act 1974. This risk assessment is intended to identify hazards that could cause harm, to assess the risks that may arise from those hazards, and to decide on suitable measures to eliminate or control the risks.Risk assessments should be completed for all pre-planned operations and should:  identify hazards that could cause harm to police officers and staff assess the risks that may arise from those hazards ensure that all control measures are in place note if any further action is required to eliminate or control the risksAs the incident progresses, the officer in charge must continually assess any new hazards or risks and reassess any identified existing risks. Risk assessment forms should be retained by the officer in charge and filed with all relevant documentation.Back to Civil contingencies overviewTagsCivil emergencies
Title: SERIOUS CRIME BILL: INTRODUCTION OF NEW OFFENCE OF THE UNAUTHORISED POSSESSION OF KNIVES AND OFFENSIVE WEAPONS WITHIN THE PRISON ESTATEIA No: MoJ019/2014Lead department or agency:Ministry of JusticeOther departments or agencies:Home OfficeSummary: Intervention and Options
Impact Assessment (IA)Date: 20/10/2014 Stage: FinalSource of intervention: DomesticType of measure: Primary legislationContact for enquiries: Emma Prince emma.prince@noms.gsi.gov.uk0300 0476202RPC Opinion: RPC Opinion Status
Cost of Preferred (or more likely) Option
Total Net Present Value
Business Net Present Value
Net cost to business per year (EANCB on 2009 prices)
In scope of One-In, Two-Out?
Measure qualifies as
£m	£0m	£0m	No	In/Out/zero net costWhat is the problem under consideration? Why is government intervention necessary?Whilst possession of an offensive weapon or bladed article is a criminal offence in a public place and in a school, it is not currently a criminal offence in prison. This has led to a disparity between the penalties available to tackle this sort of crime in the community and those available within prison. Currently, finds of weapons in prison are dealt with via the internal adjudication process. However, the most serious cases of weapon possession would be better dealt with via the Criminal Justice System as it allows for longer custodial sentences to be imposed and ensures that the offence is recorded on the offender’s criminal  record. Government intervention is therefore necessary to address the disparity, and to secure the ability to pursue criminal prosecution in the most serious cases of possession in prison.What are the policy objectives and the intended effects?* To ensure that there are adequate measures available within prison to deal with such crimes with punishments which are proportionate to both the seriousness of the offence and comparable to that available in the community.* To provide that those who commit offences can be held to account by having an appropriate criminal record which can be considered in any future sentencing and, through the criminal conviction, to ensure that the police have a record of a violent offence for that offender in case of future involvement in crime.	* Overall, to contribute to making prisons a safer place for both staff and prisoners.What policy options have been considered, including any alternatives to regulation? Please justify preferred option (further details in Evidence Base)Option 0 - Do nothing. Continue to rely on the existing prison adjudication process to punish all prisoners found to possess a knife, bladed article or offensive weapon whilst in prison custody.Option 1 – Create an offence of the unauthorised possession within prison (including Young Offender Institutes (YOI)) of a knife, or bladed or pointed weapon or other offensive weapon (as defined in section 1(9) of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984) - a triable either way offence with a maximum penalty of four years’ imprisonment.Option 1 is the preferred option as it meets the intended policy objectives set out in the previous section.Will the policy be reviewed? It will be reviewed. If applicable, set review date: June/2016Does implementation go beyond minimum EU requirements?N/AAre any of these organisations in scope? If Micros not exempted set out reason in Evidence Base.MicroNo< 2.0NoSmallNoMediumNoLargeNoWhat is the CO2 equivalent change in greenhouse gas emissions? (Million tonnes CO2 equivalent)Traded:N/ANon-traded:N/AI have read the Impact Assessment and I am satisfied that (a) it represents a fair and reasonable view of the expected costs, benefits and impact of the policy, and (b) that the benefits justify the costs.Signed by: Andrew Selous, ParliamentaryUnder-Secretary of State for Justice		Date:	 20/10/2014		
Summary: Analysis & Evidence	Policy Option 1Description:FULL ECONOMIC ASSESSMENTPrice Base YearPV Base YearTime Period YearsNet Benefit (Present Value (PV)) (£m)Low: OptionalHigh: OptionalBest Estimate:COSTS (£m)Total Transition(Constant Price)	YearsAverage Annual(excl. Transition) (Constant Price)Total Cost(Present Value)Low£0.251N/AN/AHigh£0.85N/AN/ABest EstimateN/ADescription and scale of key monetised costs by ‘main affected groups’Any additional referrals and subsequent prosecutions for the proposed offence would have cost implications for Criminal Justice agencies (including the Police, the Crown Prosecution Service (CPS), Her Majesty’s Courts and Tribunals Service (HMCTS), the Legal Aid Agency (LAA) and National Offender Management Services (NOMS)). Overall we estimate additional costs to the Criminal Justice System of between £250,000 and £850,000 per year (in 2013/14 prices, rounded to nearest £50k), including around 10 to 15 additional prison places.Other key non-monetised costs by ‘main affected groups’There may be minimal one-off training and familiarisation costs to the police, the judiciary and NOMS.BENEFITS (£m)Total Transition(Constant Price)	YearsAverage Annual(excl. Transition) (Constant Price)Total Benefit(Present Value)LowN/AN/AN/AHighN/AN/AN/ABest EstimateN/AN/AN/ADescription and scale of key monetised benefits by ‘main affected groups’It has not been possible to monetise the benefits.Other key non-monetised benefits by ‘main affected groups’This measure will close a loophole in the law with knives and offensive weapons, making it a criminal offence to possess such articles in prison, in line with possession of such articles in the community. This will allow longer sentences to be given for the more serious offences and may have general benefits in relation to public confidence in the fairness of the justice system. Criminalisation will also ensure that more serious weapon possession offences are punished through the Criminal Justice System (“CJS”) rather than the adjudication system, which is sometimes less appropriate for punishing more serious offences. Punishing some incidents of weapon possession through the CJS will also ensure that these incidents appear on the offenders’ criminal records, allowing the police to more adequately assess the risk of these offenders should they go on to reoffend. This information can also be used in any future sentencing decisions, where relevant. The new offence may also have general benefits as regards the safety of prisoners and staff in prison, although the magnitude of this is uncertain as the evidence on deterrence is mixed.Key assumptions/sensitivities/risks	Discount rate (%)N/AWe use internal NOMS operational data and published data from three existing offences to estimate: the volume of cases for the new offence referred to the police; the likely number of subsequent prosecutions; the proportion of cases tried in the magistrates’ Court vs. the Crown Court; the proportion of defendants found guilty and the average custodial sentence length given. We assume a constant number of referrals/prosecutions over time. We assume that all convicted offenders will be given a custodial sentence, which will be served consecutively to their existing sentence. The main risks are that there are more referrals/prosecutions and that more are tried in the Crown Court where costs (including legal aid costs) tend to be higher. There is also the risk, that offenders are given longer custodial sentences. See the assumptions and risks section below for full details.BUSINESS ASSESSMENT (Option 1)Direct impact on business (Equivalent Annual) £m:In scope of OITO?	Measure qualifies asCosts: £0mBenefits: £0mNet: £0mNoZero net cost
Evidence Base (for summary sheets)Introduction1. It is currently a criminal offence under the Prison Act 1952 to convey a range of items into or out of prisons, or to pass them to prisoners, or leave them in a place where they could come into the possession of prisoners. The Prison Act sets out three lists of items at reducing levels of seriousness with corresponding maximum penalties:Prohibited items are classified as List A, List B or List C items, as set out below:* List A items – controlled drugs, explosives, firearms or ammunition and any other offensive weapon – Maximum penalty: 10 years’ imprisonment or unlimited fine* List B items - alcohol, mobile telephones, cameras, sound recording devices (or constituent part of the latter three items) – Maximum penalty: 2 years’ imprisonment or unlimited fine.* List C items - tobacco, money, clothing, food, drink, letters, paper, books, tools, information technology equipment. – Maximum penalty: level 3 fine (currently, £1,000).2. It is not currently a criminal offence to possess a knife, bladed or pointed weapon or other offensive weapon within prison. There are existing offences for possession of a knife or other offensive weapon in, (section 1 of the Prevention of Crime Act 1953 and sections 139 and 139A of the Criminal Justice Act (CJA) 1988,) but they are confined to public places or schools. Prisons do not fall within the definition of a public place. Currently, possession of such items is dealt with under the prison adjudication system.3. The Prison Adjudication Process deals with instances where offences against discipline are alleged to have been committed by prisoners or young offenders. The Prison Rules 1999 and the Young Offender Institution Rules 2000 sets out what constitutes an offence against discipline, the procedure and possible punishments for those found guilty.4. Adjudications may be conducted by the Governor of a prison (or Director of a private prison) or delegated to another suitably experienced and trained member of staff at operational managerial level. Where the disciplinary offence is also a crime the adjudicator may take a decision to suspend the adjudication and refer the case to the police. If the police (or CPS) decide not to proceed then the adjudication can be reconvened and the internal disciplinary processes continued. All but the most serious of crimes tend to be dealt with in this way as otherwise it is not possible to subsequently adjudicate if the police decline to pursue the case (where a prisoner is charged with an offence against discipline, the charge must be laid as soon as possible and save in exceptional circumstances within 48 hours of discovery of the offence). On a finding of guilt a Governor may award punishments including: loss of privileges; removal from work or from activities; stoppage of earnings; removal from a wing or cellular confinement for up to 21 days.5. In serious cases, a Governor can refer cases to Independent Adjudicators (IAs) as they have the powers to add days to a prisoner’s sentence. An IA may award up to 42 added days for each offence. Added days do not add to the total sentence but are taken from the period the prisoner may have served on licence in the community and are added to the period they spend in prison.  IAs are District Judges or Deputy1. 
District Judges approved by the Lord Chancellor for the purpose of enquiring into charges referred to them.Problem under considerationClosing a loophole in existing law6. It is not currently a criminal offence to possess a knife or an offensive weapon within prison. Section 1(4) of the Prevention of Crime Act 1953 and section 139(7) of the Criminal Justice Act 1988, the term “public place” includes any place to which the public have, or are permitted access. A prison does not fall within the definition of a public place in section 139(7). Prisons naturally have issues with violence at least equivalent to those experienced in the community, and so should adopt at least the maximum punishment available in the community.7. Whilst possession of an offensive weapon is currently dealt with as a disciplinary offence within prison (for possession of an unauthorised item) the maximum penalty for the internal disciplinary offence is 42 added days served in prison compared to the four years’ custodial maximum for the equivalent offences in the community.1 It is important that we address that disparity and strengthen the available options to punish offenders to ensure consistency with existing offences committed in public places.8. Gang members in the community are more likely to carry weapons than other young people and the Ministry of Justice recognises that a tough legislative framework is vital to stop weapons’ carrying and supply in the community. The law has been strengthened by introducing new offences of threatening with a knife or offensive weapon possession for those who carry a knife or offensive weapon in a public place or in a school and go on to threaten and cause an immediate risk of serious physical harm to another person (Legal Aid, Sentencing and Punishment of Offenders Act 2012 which inserted section 139AA of the Criminal Justice Act 1988). Prison often mirrors society and gang and extremist activity is common within many prison and young offender establishments. As such, the culture of weapon-enabled violence in prisons needs to be tackled with strong action and an appropriate criminal offence.9. Prisons already have in place a comprehensive range of robust searching techniques and security measures to detect weapons at the point of entry or concealed within the establishment and to provide a deterrent effect. Such measures include basic and enhanced rub down searching and full searching of prisoners, staff and visitors, as appropriate, the use of x-ray machines and CCTV surveillance cameras, the use of metal detectors and body orifice scanners which can detect metallic items concealed internally. Routine and intelligence-led searching of living accommodation and communal areas is also widely deployed.10. NOMS does not tolerate violence of any kind in prison and takes any instance extremely seriously. Robust action is already taken by prisons, in instances in which weapons are found or assaults are committed. For example, prisoners may be subject to adjudication/disciplinary procedures and may be segregated, and criminal prosecution may be pursued where violence involving weapons is used, where possible. The introduction of the new offence will support these measures and help to ensure that appropriate action can be taken against offenders.1 There are several possession offences in the community including: possession of a knife or bladed instrument in a public place and possession of an offensive weapon without lawful authority in a public place.1 
Allowing more serious possession offences to be dealt with in the Criminal Justice System11. There are various problems with dealing with some of the more serious possession offences via the adjudication system, which should not be seen as a replacement for the wider Criminal Justice System. The principal problems are:a. Limit on the numbers of days that may be “added”.b. Findings of guilt are not recorded as criminal offences so do not appear on the Police National Computer. This means that they cannot be taken into account as previous convictions during any future police investigation or sentencing at any future court appearance. It also means that they are not disclosable to future employers or others entitled to know of spent or unspent convictions.c. There are also a range of prisoners who cannot receive additional days in custody including: Indeterminate Sentence prisoners such as those serving life sentences, those under 18 subject to Detention and Training Orders (DTO), and foreign nationals who have completed a determinate sentence and are now held solely under immigration powers.d. Currently, unsentenced prisoners held on remand may only be given prospective added days but these do not come into effect if the prisoner is subsequently found innocent or given a non-custodial sentence.e. A prisoner who has not had a further finding of guilt at an adjudication for six months (four months for young offenders) since the date of the offence for which additional days were imposed may apply for some of the days to be remitted (known within establishments as ‘Restoration of Remission’). This is usually up to 50% of any added days but can exceptionally be more and up to 100%.12. It may be possible to amend the adjudication system so that it could provide for more added days. However, the adjudication system is designed as a quick and efficient way of dealing with relatively less serious offences within prison. For these reasons, the CJS is better placed to deal with the most serious cases of weapon possession.Violence within prisons13. Whilst there have been many improvements to prison safety, assaults and violence may still occur and, if left unchecked, can quickly destabilise a prison and threaten the safety of both staff and prisoners. Weapon-enabled violence, including intimidation, is not acceptable in any environment and those who continue to engage in this behaviour in prison should face a criminal charge, where possible. There is a strong public interest in doing more to deter knife crime in the prison environment where offenders are living in close proximity to one another.14. Whilst assaults without weapons are more common2, assaults with weapons still occur and inflict life-changing injuries on both staff and other prisoners. Control and order is a fundamental foundation of prison life and without it the rehabilitation of prisoners may not be effective because of constant disruptions to the regime caused by security incidents, the need to close down the prison to search for weapons, general violence, intimidation and other disruptive behaviour which is not conducive to2 In 2013 there were 14,125 assaults within prisons and YOIs in England and Wales and 2,278 (16%) involved use of a weapon with 828 (6%) involving use of a knife, blade or sharp/blunt instrument.1 
effective learning. It is vital that all those working and incarcerated in a prison feel as safe as possible in such a closed environment.Response to Violence in Prisons15. NOMS is committed to reducing levels of violence in prison. Prisons already have in place security measures to detect and deter weapons including metal detectors and wands, frequent searching programmes of both prisoners and locations within the prison, as well as intelligence systems used to target searches. There is a comprehensive programme of work underway to reduce violence and the effect of violence, including protection of staff – for example by use of stab resistant material in vests; or by deterring attacks - for example by introducing body cameras to record prisoner interaction.Policy objective16. The primary policy objective of making possession of an offensive weapon in custody a criminal offence is to close a gap in the existing possession laws; to ensure that the treatment and maximum punishment for possession whilst in prison is comparable to that available in the community.17. Criminalising weapon possession in custody would also help to ensure that those prisoners committing serious offences can be dealt with by the CJS. This means that this offence will appear on the criminal record of those offenders who are found guilty of possession of such items. This will make knowledge of these serious offences available in future sentencing decisions but also to the police. Ensuring this information is available to the police may assist them in detecting potentially dangerous offenders.18. The convictions will be recorded formally on national crime statistics. This will ensure that this type of crime is reflected in available national statistics and taken into account in any decision making on crime management.19. The proposed measure is associated with a wider package of measures being implemented in prisons aimed at reducing violence and making prisons safer. The impact of introducing this offence may or may not serve as a deterrent for some prisoners but it will help to emphasise the message sent to prisons that violence in prison will not be tolerated. This in turn will be re-enforced by a range of other measures (as outlined in paragraph 12).Rationale for intervention20. In this case, the Government is intervening to address the anomalies in current legislation in dealing with more serious offences as outlined above.Proposed reforms21. A new clause will be tabled at Lord’s Report of the Serious Crime Bill which will create a new criminal offence where a person possesses, without authorisation, a bladed or sharply pointed article (such as a knife) or other offensive weapon (as defined in section 1(9) of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984). The clause will amend the Prison Act 1952 so that the maximum sentence available for commission of the offence in a prison mirrors the maximum sentence in the community.1. 
22. It will be a triable either way offence with a maximum penalty of four years’ imprisonment on conviction on indictment, or a fine, or both, or on summary conviction a maximum penalty of six months’ imprisonment, or a fine, or both.23. There are circumstances where it is necessary for persons in prison (including prisoners) to have possession of bladed or sharply pointed articles, particularly knives and other tools which may constitute offensive weapons in another context. Knives and bladed items are necessary in a limited range of circumstances such as in workshops and for preparing food. Security and risk-based assessments must be undertaken by prisons before anyone is permitted to work or have access to an environment where such articles are available.24. Section 39 to 42 of the Prison Act 1999 set out existing that are specific to prison criminal offences, including offences around conveying certain articles into or out of prison, without authorisation. “Authorisation” in relation to all prisons may be given by the Secretary of State or by the Prison Rules 1999 and in relation to a particular prison by the Secretary of State, the Governor or the Director or by an authorised staff member. The powers around authorisation will be applied to the new offence.Main affected groups25. The following groups would be affected by this policy:* Police* Crown Prosecution Service (CPS)* Her Majesty’s Courts and Tribunals service (HMCTS)* Legal Aid Agency (LAA)* Lawyers* National Offender Management Services (NOMS)* Victims and potential victimsCosts and Benefits26. This Impact Assessment identifies both monetised and non-monetised impacts from society’s perspective, with the aim of understanding what the net social impact to society might be from implementing these options. The costs and benefits of each option are compared to the do nothing option. Impact Assessments place a strong emphasis on the monetisation of costs and benefits. However there are important aspects that cannot sensibly be monetised. These might be distributional impacts on certain groups of society or changes in equity or fairness, either positive or negative.Option 0 – Do nothing27. This option would mean maintaining the status quo and not creating a new offence. This could have unquantifiable costs to prisons and prisoners because of the existing problem of violence and the presence of weapons within prisons. NOMS is committed to reducing violent crimes in prisons and ensuring that those crimes that are committed are dealt with effectively and robustly.28. In the base case, prisoners found to possess these articles would continue to be dealt with via the internal adjudication system. Under the adjudication system some of the offenders found to possess an offensive weapon may have additional days added to their sentence. These additional days will impact on the number of prison places. As data on the outcome of adjudications for weapon possession in prison is not systematically collated, we have been unable to estimate the prison place impact of these additional days given. However, given the maximum number of days that may1. 
be given is 42; that not all offenders will be given additional days and that some offenders may remit some of their additional days; we anticipate the impact is relatively small.29. Because the do-nothing option is compared against itself its costs and benefits are necessarily zero, as is its Net Present Value (NPV).Option 1 – Creating an offence of possession of a knife, bladed article or offensive weapon in prison – an either way offence with a maximum penalty of four years imprisonment.Costs30. We estimate that the overall additional cost to the CJS will be between £250,000 and£850,000 per year (rounded to the nearest £50k, in 2013/14 prices). This includes costs to the police of investigating additional referrals and costs to the wider CJS (including the CPS, HMCTS, LAA and NOMS) of any subsequent additional prosecutions and convictions. Costs to both are set out in more detail below.31. Estimates include around 10 to 15 additional prison places per year. Note that as some of these offenders would currently be given additional days through the existing adjudication system, this potentially overstates the impact on prison places. Without robust data on the outcome of adjudication, it is not possible to calculate the net impact on prison places, however overall we expect the impact will be similar to our estimate.32. Using existing adjudication and incident reports, NOMS estimate that the new offence could lead to an additional 160 to 480 referrals to the police per annum for finds directly attributable to a prisoner. See annex A for a fuller outline of how this estimate was derived.The police33. These additional referrals would impose downstream costs on the police of investigating reported incidents. There is some uncertainty about how long these investigations would take, however police force estimates3 suggest that they could last between 8 and 14 hours. Assuming that all referrals directly attributable to an individual are investigated, we estimate yearly costs to the police of between £50,000 and £250,0004. This is based on the average hourly opportunity cost of a Sergeant’s time.Wider CJS (including the Crown Prosecution Service, Her Majesty’s Courts and Tribunal Services, the Legal Aid Agency and National Offender Management Services).34. A proportion of the defendants referred will be prosecuted and these additional prosecutions will have costs on the wider CJS as they progress through the system. Using the estimated number of referrals for knife/weapon possession (NOMS), and data from the proxy offence of possession of a mobile phone in prison, we estimate that there will be around 30 to 80 additional prosecutions per year for the proposed new offence. The remaining cases of finds of weapons would not be referred either because there is insufficient evidence to prove possession; because there are3 Estimates are based on data and experience of one police force only and therefore may not be fully representative of all forces.4 In 2013/14 prices, rounded to nearest £50,0001 
insufficient aggravating factors in the circumstances of the crime to warrant referral or there is likelihood that the case would be discontinued by the police or CPS on public interest grounds.35. To estimate the progression of a case through the Criminal Justice system and the associated costs to each agency (including CPS, HMCTS, LAA and NOMS) we use three proxy offences:i. Offences relating to having an article with blade or point in public place,5ii. Possession of offensive weapons in a public place without lawful authority or reasonable excuse,6iii. Offence of unauthorised possession inside a prison of an item [mobile phone] specified in section 40D(3B) of the Prison Act 1952.36. Using data for proxy offences one and two from 2013, we estimate that approximately 80% of all cases will be tried in the magistrates’ court and 20% in the Crown Court where the CPS, HMCTS and LAA costs tend to be higher. Proxy offences one and two were used because experience suggests that the nature of the item possessed is likely to impact of the perceived seriousness of the offence, and will therefore have a greater on impact on where the defendant is tried than where the offence was committed.37. Using data from proxy offence three, we estimate that approximately 80% of defendants will be found guilty. Offence three was used because experience suggested that where the alleged offence was committed would have a greater impact on the likelihood of conviction than the nature of the article possessed.38. As the offence is committed whilst in custody, we assume that all convicted offenders will be given immediate custody and that custodial sentences are served consecutively. Using data from 2013 for proxy offences one and two, we assume that offenders will be given average custodial sentence length (ACSL) of approximately six months. We use proxy offences one and two because they have the same maximum penalty (four years imprisonment) as the proposed offence (offence three’s maximum penalty is two years imprisonment).39. Based on the above assumptions we estimate total yearly costs to the wider CJS (including the CPS, HMCTS, LAA and NOMS) of between £200,000 and £600,000,.740. The estimated volumes include referrals and prosecutions for both adult and juveniles found to possess offensive weapons. We have not independently assessed the costs of additional proceedings and convictions in the youth estate as the proportion of under 18’s in the estate is very small. It is worth noting that the cost of detaining an under 18 is likely to be substantially higher than the costs for an adult. However, given the relatively small number of under 18s in the estate, the additional costs of the new offence to the youth estate is expected to be minimal.41. Further information on all cost estimates above can be found in the assumptions and risks section below.5 In section 139 of the Criminal Justice Act 1988. Triable either way offence with a maximum penalty of four years’ imprisonment.6 In section 1 of the Prevention of Crime Act 1953. Triable either way offence with a maximum penalty of four years’imprisonment.7 In 2013/14 prices and rounded to the nearest £50k.1 
42. There may also be some minimal one-off costs associated with training and familiarisation for the police, the judiciary and NOMs (i.e. prison staff), it has not been possible to quantify these.Benefits43. The main benefit of creating the proposed offence is that it will bring possession of knife and other offensive weapons in prison in line with possession in a public place.44. Aligning the maximum penalties will allow longer custodial sentences to be given in more serious cases and in such cases will ensure that the offence goes onto the offender’s criminal record. The possession of a weapon in prison is a serious offence and the internal adjudication prison system currently used is not always an adequate route for dealing with such cases, as outlined previously.45. The new offence will mean that criminal proceedings may be brought against those in prison who habitually carry or use weapons or belong to criminal gangs. Once released from prison, these offenders will carry a criminal record for a violence-related offence which will be recorded on the Police National Computer and which will assist the police in future dealings with such offenders. Finally, if the offender is convicted of a further similar offence in the future then there will be a previous criminal record on file available to inform the court during sentencing.46. Criminalising possession of a knife in prison may also decrease the incidents of knife possession and help protect potential victims of knife and other weapon crime in custody. However, it is unclear how substantial this benefit would be as we cannot be certain what the deterrent effect would be.Enforcement of Proposed Reform47. As with all criminal offences in prison, the prison may refer an alleged crime to the police who will decide whether to investigate and make a decision on referral to the CPS for prosecution. If the police or CPS decide not to proceed then the matter may revert to be considered for internal prison adjudication.48. NOMS, the college of Policing and the CPS are developing guidelines for referring, investigating and prosecuting crimes in prison. Some offences (such as assaults on staff) are considered in more detail with specific aggravating and mitigating factors set out in Operational Guidance Documents for prisons and police to consider in making decisions on referral for investigation by the police. An Operational Guidance Document will be developed for this offence. Examples of typical aggravating factors in this offence will include previous history of possession of such weapons, threats to use the weapon, membership of known criminal gangs. Mitigating factors will include history of self-harm with blades.1. 
Assumptions/RisksAssumptionRiskNumber of referrals to the police* 	As the statistics concerning weapon finds are not collected systematically, we are unable to determine long term trends.* 	We therefore assume that the number of referrals will not change over time.* The number of referrals increases over time.Costs to police of investigating referrals* Each referral would take between 8 and 14 hours to investigate.Source: HO internal estimates (2014).* The opportunity cost of an officer ranking sergeant or below’s time is approximately £35 per hour. This estimate is based on standard pay, hours, expenses, pensions, National Insurance contributions and police workforce statistics.Source: HO internal estimates (2013/14)* Estimates regarding the length of an investigation are based on data from one police force and their experience of investigating the existing offence of possession of a mobile phone in prison. There is a risk that the timings aren’t representative of all police forces. Further police forces were not consulted due to time constraints.* The length of an investigation will vary from case to case and the estimates presented are based on best judgement.* The opportunity cost of an officer includes overhead costs (such as premise costs) and therefore is not strictly a marginal cost.* The hourly estimate is an average for all police grades of ‘sergeant and below’ and the actual cost at each grade within this category is likely to differ.Number of referrals prosecuted by the CPS* The same proportion of referrals will be prosecuted as for the proxy offence of possession of a mobile phone in prison.Source: NOMs internal estimates and further breakdown of Criminal Justice Statistics, Ministry of Justice (MoJ), 2013.* Fewer/more cases will be prosecuted- either because more cases are referred or more cases are prosecuted.* Every effort is made to ensure that the data used and figures presented are accurate and complete. However, it is important to note that these data have been extracted from large administrative data systems generated by the courts. As a consequence, care should be taken to ensure data collection processes and their inevitable limitations are taken into account when those data are usedProgression of cases through the CJS
Three proxy offences are used to estimate the progression of cases:1. Offences relating to having an article with blade or point in public place,82. Possession of offensive weapons in a public place without lawful authority or reasonable excuse,93. Offence of unauthorised possession inside a prison of an item [mobile phone] specified in section 40D(3B) of the Prison Act 1952.Proportion of cases tried in the magistrates vs. the Crown Court* 82% of cases were tried in the magistrates’, and 18% in the Crown (using 2013 data from proxy offence one and two).* 	We assume the proportions tried in each court for the proposed offence will be the same.Source: Further breakdown of Criminal Justice Statistics, Ministry of Justice (MoJ), 2013.More cases will be tried in the Crown where the costs tend to be higher.Proportion of defendants found guilty* Around 80% of defendants are convicted (from proxy offence three). We assume this will be the same for the proposed offence.Source: Further breakdown of Criminal Justice Statistics, Ministry of Justice (MoJ), 2013.* Fewer/more defendants will be convicted.Disposals given:* All offenders are given a custodial sentence.* All custodial sentences are served consecutively.Average custodial sentence length:* 	We use latest data from proxy offences 1 and 2 to estimate the ACSL give. This is because they have the same maximum penalty as the proposed offence.* Data from 2013 shows that across both offences the ACSL given was around six months, we assume this will be the same for the proposed offence.Source: Further breakdown of Criminal Justice Statistics, Ministry of Justice (MoJ), 2013.* Risk that the time between charge and conviction means that some offenders are sentenced whilst out of custody and therefore are given a disposal other than a custodial sentence.* Possibility that custodial sentences are served concurrently and pose no additional costs on the prisons service. This is a judicial decision.* That the ACSL given is shorter or longer.* Offenders given less than 12 months in custody are not currently subject to supervision on release. Under the Offender Rehabilitation Act 2014 this will change but for the purposes of this IA we have based estimates of cost on current8 In section 139 of the Criminal Justice Act 1988. Triable either way offence with a maximum penalty of four years’ imprisonment.9 In section 1 of the Prevention of Crime Act 1953. Triable either way offence with a maximum penalty of four years’imprisonment.
* As the ACSL is less than 12 months we assume that offenders served half of their sentence in custody and have no post-release licence requirements.Source: MoJ Internal Analysis 2014.practice.* Our analysis does not take into account the possible interaction with other policies that have not yet been commenced.* There is the risk that such policies, once commenced, could have an impact on the base case set out in this impact assessment. As a result, the associated impacts may be under or over estimated.
Cost assumptionsCPS costs, advocacy costs:* The estimated CPS costs consist of two broad categories, advocacy costs and Activity Based Costings (ABC).The primary purpose of the ABC model is resource distribution, and has several limitations (see risks). The range of costs reflects the different ABC and advocacy costs for guilty plea and effective trials, as well as the assumption that 80% of the cases would be prosecuted in the magistrates’ courts and 20% in the Crown Court.Source: CPS 2014; MoJ internal analysis, 2014.* The key limitation of the ABC model is that it is built purely on staff time and excludes accommodation and other ancillary costs (e.g. those associated with complex cases and witness care). It also relies on several assumptions. This could mean there is a risk that costs are underestimated. For further information about how CPS ABC costs are calculated please see the following CPS guidance (CPS, 2012): http://www.cps.gov.uk/publications/finan ce/abc_guide.pdf.HMCTS costs (magistrates):To generate the costs by offence categories, HMCTS timings data for each offence group were applied to court costs per sitting day.Magistrates’ court costs are £1,100 per sitting day in 2013/14 prices. A sitting day is assumed to be five hours. The HMCTS costs are based on average judicial and staff costs, found at HMCTS Annual Report and Accounts 2012-13. HMCTS timings data from the Activity based costing (ABC) model, the Timeliness Analysis Report (TAR) data set and the costing process.Timings data for offence categories:* The timings data are based on the time that a legal advisor is present in court. This is used as a proxy for court time. Please note that, there may be a difference in average hearing times as there is no timing available e.g. when a District Judge (magistrates’ court) sits.* The timings data are based on the time that a legal advisor is present in court. This is used as a proxy for court time. Please note that, there may be a difference in average hearing times as there is no timing available e.g. when a DJ(MC) sits.* Timings do not take into account associated admin time related with having a case in court. This could mean that costings are an underestimate. There is some information is available on admin time, however we have excluded it for simplicity.* The timings are collection of data from February 2009. Any difference in these timings could influence costings.* The timings data also excludes any adjournments (although the HMCTS ABC model does include them), and is based on a case going through either one guilty plea trial (no trial) or one effective (not guilty plea) trial. However a combination of cracked, ineffective and effective trials could occur in the case route. As a result the costings could ultimately be underestimates.* Guilty plea proportions at the Initial hearing from Q2 in 2012 are used, based on the
Time Analysis Report. As these can fluctuate, any changes in these proportions could influence court calculations (effective trials take longer in court than no trials (trials where there was a guilty plea at the initial hearing).HMCTS average costs per sitting day:HMCTS court costs used may be an underestimate as they include only judicial and staff costs. Other key costs which inevitably impact on the cost of additional cases in the courts have not been considered; for examplejuror costs.HMCTS costs (crown):Timings data for types of case (eg, indictable only, triable either way) were applied to Crown Court costs per sitting day. This was added to the cost of the initial hearing in the magistrates’ court, as all criminal cases start in themagistrates’ courts. Crown Court cost is £1,500 per sitting day in 2013/14 prices, assuming a sitting day is five hours. The HMCTS costs are based on average judicial and staff costs, found at HMCTS Annual Report and Accounts 2012- 13.Timings data for types of cases:* The average time figures which provide the information for the timings do not include any down time. This would lead to an underestimate in the court costing.* Timings do not take into account associated admin time related with listing a case for court hearings. This could mean that costings are an underestimate.* The data which informed the timings data excludes cases where a bench warrant was issued, no plea recorded, indictment to lie on file, found unfit to plead, and other results.* Committals for sentence excludecommittals after breach, ‘bring backs’ and deferred sentences.HMCTS average costs per sitting day:* HMCTS court costs used may be an underestimate as they include only judicial and staff costs. Other key costs which inevitably impact on the cost of additional cases in the courts have not been considered; for example juror costs.* Legal Aid Costs:Cases in the magistrates court* We assume an eligibility rate for legal aid in the magistrates’ court of 100%.* The average cost per case is £485, and that there is one defendant per case. This is based on the latest available legal aid statistics (Jan-Mar 2014), and is calculated by dividing total case value by total case volume. See: https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/legal-aid-statistics-april-2013-to-Magistrates court* 	Variance in the legal aid eligibility rate assumed for cases in the magistrates’ courts would impact the costings.* More than one defendant prosecuted per case and therefore more solicitors and barristers per case than assumed thus understating the actual cost.Crown Court:* Assuming 100% eligibility for legal aid in the Crown Court carries several other risks.
march-2014 (Main tables, table 2.3).Cases in the Crown Court* The eligibility rate for legal aid is 100%.* The average cost per defendant is around £900 in 2013/14 prices (based on offence category H: Miscellaneous offences).* We assume one defendant per case. One defendant instructs one solicitor who submits one bill. As such, we use the cost per solicitor bill from the 2013/14 data as a proxy for the cost per defendant.Source: https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/leg al-aid-statistics-april-2013-to-march-2014Firstly, an individual may refuse legal aid. Secondly, an individual may be required to contribute to legal aid costs. Lastly, the size of this contribution can vary.* There is more than one defendant prosecuted per case and therefore more solicitors and barristers per case than assumed thus understating the actual cost.Prison costs:* We assume that an offender serves half of their given custodial sentence (in this case that they serve approximately three months in prison, on average).* The cost per prison place is approximately£28,000.Source: NOMS management accounts addendum (2012/13).* The cost of additional prison places is also dependent on the existing prison population, as if there is spare capacity in terms of prison places then the marginal cost of accommodating more offenders will be relatively low due to existing large fixed costs and low variable costs. Conversely, if the current prison population is running at or over capacity then marginal costs would be significantly higher as contingency measures will have to be found.Probation costs:* We assume there are no probation costs associated with this offence. This is because we assume all offenders are given a custodial sentence of less than 12 months imprisonment and therefore they are not subject to post custodial release licence conditions.* We have based our estimates on current practice. However the Offender Rehabilitation Act 2014 includes provisions to introduce post release licence conditions for offenders given a custodial sentence of less than 12 months.* After the commencement of these provisions, there will be costs associated with post release licence for offenders convicted of this offence who are sentenced to immediate custody. The wider costs of extending post-release supervision to any offenders released from short custodial sentences will be met through savings realised from the Transforming Rehabilitation reforms to probation services.
ANNEX AEstimating the number of referrals to the policeReferrals were estimated to be in the range of 160 to 480 per annum. The 160 is a minimum estimate based on those incidents where the weapon was used as part of an assault but those assaults are not currently referred to the police. The new offence would make this far more likely. The 480 figure draws from a wider range of incidents including more “passive” finds of such weapons where they can be attributed to an identified prisoner. The actual number of finds of weapons in prison is greater than this but in many cases they are not found in the possession of a person or possession cannot be proved. In other cases it would be inappropriate to refer to the police (self harm, for example).The number of referrals was estimated using a variety of information, including:* 	Published numbers of adjudications for possession of an unauthorised article and actual numbers of offensives weapons used in assaults to make inferences about the likely range of referrals to the police for possession of an offensive weapon;* 	Data on the circumstances in which weapons were found, how many were attributable to prisoners, and the type of weapon found;* 	Data on the differential referral rates of different incident and weapon types and using operational experience to indicate the likely percentages that might be referred and latest data on referrals and prosecutions for existing offence of possession of a mobile phone in prison.Currently offences involving possession of weapons are dealt with using the prison disciplinary system. There is no specific disciplinary offence for possession of weapons – it is recorded under ‘possession of an unauthorised item’ which includes a large range of other items in addition to weapons. It is therefore not possible to estimate numbers of cases that might be referred to the police using just disciplinary system records.Instead, over 60,000 records from the national Incident Reporting System (IRS) were analysed in 2013 to identify those which might be captured by the new offence. The vast majority of cases where weapons are found in prison will be recorded on IRS. Over 1,100 records involving weapons were identified and examined in detail, to screen out: those that could not be attributable to an individual; those that might not result in a referral to the police (for example, because the weapon was used in self harm only); or those in which the weapon was part of an incident (such as assault) already referred to the police.In arriving at the estimated number of referrals, the following assumptions were made:* 	The knife/offensive weapon found must be attributable to an individual prisoner for referral to be considered.* 	Referral rates will vary depending on the nature/type of the weapon as some are more dangerous than others.* 	It is estimated that 80% of cases involving a knife/bladed weapon would be referred to police, but fewer (20%) of other offensive weapons would be referred;* 	If a more serious offence could be attributed to a case of possession (i.e. offences where weapons were found which related to assault, arson, hostage-taking etc), then that offence would be used in pursuit of prosecution.* 	Where ‘improvised weapon’ or ‘home made weapon’ was mentioned in an incident report we assumed that half would be treated as knife/blade related weapons with an 80% referral rate.The key sensitivity with the above is the percentage of cases that would be referred to the police. The volume of referrals is highly uncertain and estimates are based on the experience of NOMS staff. It is possible that numbers will fluctuate.
?	Brazil	Vibrant: Virtual Brazilian Anthropol… ?
? English?
» Abstracts?»» References» Publication dates» History
??Articles • Vibrant, Virtual Braz. Anthr. 11 (2) • Dec 2014 • https://doi.org/10.1590/S1809-43412014000200003 ? copyAnthropological perspectives on documents.
Ethnographic dialogues on the trail of police papersAbstractsThis article discusses implications and potentialities of anthropologically thinking and researching with documents, arguing that they consist of ethnographic artifacts, which can be particularly fruitful in certain research contexts. In order to do that, it resumes some movements of distancing and rapprochement between anthropology and docu- ments and places two recent ethnographic experiences in dialogue. One a research through police inquiries of Brazilian Federal Police concerning "human trafficking for sexual exploitation" crimes, and the other focused on ad- ministrative procedures related to "missing persons" cases investigated by Rio de Janeiro Civil Police. In addition to revealing the heuristic potential of "following the paper" and calling attention to the micro politics of the interac- tions among those that document and those who are documented, the paper aims to contribute to larger discus- sions about the challenges that dealing with documents in field work situations poses to anthropology and its self- representations.documents; ethnographic artifacts; Federal Police; Civil Police; human trafficking; missing personsO artigo discute implicações e potencialidades analíticas de se pensar e pesquisar antropologicamente com docu- mentos, argumentando que estes constituem artefatos etnográficos especialmente rentáveis em certos contextos de pesquisa. Para tanto, recupera alguns movimentos de distanciamento e aproximação entre a antropologia e os documentos e coloca em diálogo duas experiências etnográficas recentes: uma pesquisa em meio a inquéritos da Polícia Federal brasileira relativos a crimes de "tráfico de pessoas para fim de exploração sexual", e outra voltada para procedimentos administrativos em torno de casos de "desaparecimento de pessoa" investigados pela Polícia Civil do Rio de Janeiro. Além de revelar o potencial heurístico da escolha por "seguir o papel" e chamar atenção para a micropolítica das interações entre documentadores e documentados, o texto busca contribuir para reflexões mais amplas acerca dos desafios que a lida com documentos em situações de trabalho de campo aporta à antropologia e às suas autorrepresentações.documentos; artefatos etnográficos; Polícia Federal; Polícia Civil; tráfico de pessoas; desaparecimento de pessoasARTICLESAnthropological perspectives on documents. Ethnographic dialogues on the trail of police papers Laura Lowenkron; Letícia FerreiraABSTRACTThis article discusses implications and potentialities of anthropologically thinking and researching with documents, arguing that they consist of ethnographic artifacts, which can be particularly fruitful in certain research contexts. In order to do that, it resumes some movements of distancing and rapprochement between anthropology and docu- ments and places two recent ethnographic experiences in dialogue. One a research through police inquiries of Brazilian Federal Police concerning "human trafficking for sexual exploitation" crimes, and the other focused on ad- ministrative procedures related to "missing persons" cases investigated by Rio de Janeiro Civil Police. In addition to revealing the heuristic potential of "following the paper" and calling attention to the micro politics of the interac- tions among those that document and those who are documented, the paper aims to contribute to larger discus- sions about the challenges that dealing with documents in field work situations poses to anthropology and its self- representations.Keywords: documents, ethnographic artifacts, Federal Police, Civil Police, human trafficking, missing personsRESUMOO artigo discute implicações e potencialidades analíticas de se pensar e pesquisar antropologicamente com docu- mentos, argumentando que estes constituem artefatos etnográficos especialmente rentáveis em certos contextos de pesquisa. Para tanto, recupera alguns movimentos de distanciamento e aproximação entre a antropologia e os documentos e coloca em diálogo duas experiências etnográficas recentes: uma pesquisa em meio a inquéritos da Polícia Federal brasileira relativos a crimes de "tráfico de pessoas para fim de exploração sexual", e outra voltada para procedimentos administrativos em torno de casos de "desaparecimento de pessoa" investigados pela Polícia Civil do Rio de Janeiro. Além de revelar o potencial heurístico da escolha por "seguir o papel" e chamar atenção para a micropolítica das interações entre documentadores e documentados, o texto busca contribuir para reflexões mais amplas acerca dos desafios que a lida com documentos em situações de trabalho de campo aporta à antropologia e às suas autorrepresentações.Palavras-chave: documentos, artefatos etnográficos, Polícia Federal, Polícia Civil, tráfico de pessoas, desapareci- mento de pessoasRecent anthropological research dealing with documents has contributed to fundamental debates on classic con- ceptions of both ethnographic practice and ethnographic authority. This article seeks to discuss some theoretical and methodological dilemmas, implications and potentialities of anthropological thinking and researching with documents. In order to do that, it resumes some movements of distancing and rapprochement between anthropol- ogy and documents, and places two ethnographic experiences in dialogue. It departs from the assumption that one of the tasks that anthropology systematically faces is to rethink both the construction of its objects, and the selec- tion of the artifacts from which ethnographies are built.The "post-modern" view of ethnography as text has led anthropologists to turn their attention to other textual gen- res that had either been set aside or regarded as less important once anthropology moved away from the "arm- chair" and gained "scientific" authority and legitimacy through malinowskian fieldwork. On the one hand, "archives" came to be viewed as privileged spaces for understanding relationships between colonial governments and peo- ples traditionally studied by anthropologists (Stoler, 2002, 2009; Souza Lima, 1995). On the other, different modes of document production present in the so-called Western societies came to be analyzed as artifacts and/or knowledge practices that are crucial to understanding ethnographic universes that anthropologists have long been sharing with other disciplines, such as history, sociology and political science (cf. Riles, 2001; Latour and Woolgar, 1997).Since documents are paradigmatic artifacts of modern knowledge practices (Riles, 2006), which define both ethnog- raphy and "native" knowledge practices in some contexts, a large portion of anthropologists' activities during ethnographic fieldwork consists of reading documents produced by their interlocutors (about whom they also take notes). This has happened, as discussed throughout this article, in our own ethnographies (Ferreira 2011; Lowenkron 2012 e 2014). As Vianna (2014) suggests, working with documents, rather than raising questions about their content and reliability, involves questioning oneself about the very act of documenting. Our recent research experiences have contributed to a realization that ethnographic document analysis in the social space within which it is produced, circulated and archived offers a privileged look on the act of documenting. That is, a look on how it is accomplished, what it means and what effects it produces in different contexts.Reading inquiries and other police documents was one of the central ethnographic activities of the research carried out by one of the authors of this article on "human trafficking for sexual exploitation"1 (Lowenkron, 2014). Since a crucial part of police work is documenting investigations, "the interest our research subjects have shown in docu- ments had become contagious" (Riles, 2006, p. 8). During fieldwork, the researcher not only looked up inquiries in Federal Police headquarters and produced ethnographic accounts about them, but was also able to personally fol- low the production of some of its documents by its agents, police commissioners and registrars during criminal in- vestigations. Reading and directly observing the production of these artifacts highlighted how those who are regu- lated and constituted by these papers are not inert with regard to state documentation practices.Contact with police reports and other documents pertaining to "missing persons" cases that were produced, circu- lated and/or archived by a sector of the Rio de Janeiro Civil Police was a central element in making fieldwork possi- ble in the research carried out by this article's other author (Ferreira, 2011; 2013). On one level, the documents worked as an inescapable material support for affirming authorities and giving authorizations without which field- work would not have been possible. This reinforces the prevailing notarizing logic of Brazilian police units (Kant de Lima, 1995; Miranda et al, 2010). However, on a second level, the documents became the most crucial research ob- ject, both due to how they are viewed by the inspectors, investigators and commissioners who produce them and due to the crucial role they play in police management of "missing persons" cases in Rio de Janeiro.Based on these ethnographic experiences, which show how documents, seen within their production, circulation and archiving contexts, are especially profitable ethnographic artifacts in certain research contexts, we seek to con- tribute to broader discussions not only on the dynamics, effects and powers mobilized by documentation practices, but also on the challenges that dealing with documents in ethnographic fieldwork brings to anthropology and its self-representations. In order to do so, we analyze how these challenges presented themselves in our researches, proposing a dialogue with some discussions that have weaved through contemporary anthropological debates of the theme.Distancing and rapprochement between anthropology and documentsIn the mid-20th century, Evans-Pritchard (1950) was already drawing attention to the a-critical use of document sources as one of the problems of the not only a-historical, but anti-historical approach adopted by structural-func- tionalist anthropology, which established "participant observation" as its privileged method. If his warning "had lit- tle resonance at the time, it certainly has more today" (Stoler, 2002, p. 90). Over the past few years, several anthro- pologists have highlighted the need to go beyond documents' informational and instrumental dimension, analyz- ing them as producers of knowledge, relations, effects and affective responses (Stoler, 2002 and 2009; Cunha, 2004; Navaro-Yashin, 2007; Gupta, 2012; Ferreira, 2013) or even as artifacts whose material, aesthetic and formal proper- ties, as well as social life (or socio-technical processes) can no longer be easily ignored (Latour and Woolgar, 1997; Riles, 2006, Reed, 2006; Hull, 2012b).Despite their recent rehabilitation as ethnographic artifacts, anthropologists' relation to documents is still shot through with tensions, doubts and anxieties, no longer because it threatens the specificity of anthropology's knowl- edge practices (if we believe that these dilemmas have, or should have been, overcome), but because it produces new analytical challenges. Since ethnographic knowledge was historically represented as "diverse from, and even opposed to, that which results from documentary research" (Cunha, 2005, p.36), the task of ethnographing docu- ments may still seem strange and obscure to most ethnographers, in contrast to the allegedly self-evidence of the expression "participant observation".The epistemological devaluing of these objects, which delayed their ethnographic scrutiny, may be attributed to dif- ferent reasons. On the one hand, ethnographing documents does not guarantee the same strategies of authority de- rived from the certainties (if not of objectivity, at least of controlled partiality) produced by the experiences of direct contact and dialogue with the persons who inhabit ethnographic narratives. On the other, it requires that the re- searcher establishes a dialogue with, and consider the agency of, those who are not immediately identified as sub- jects in the research: the persons being documented and the very papers or other material supports of graphic, textual, sound and/or audiovisual records. Furthermore, there are those who consider that bureaucratic writing was long neglected because it is a very similar knowledge practice to that of anthropologists (Riles, 2006b), because it is tedious and lacking the symbolic richness or density of meaning which make a geertzian ethnographic descrip- tion possible (Graber, 2012), or because it is easy to see documents as simply giving immediate access to what they document, denying the role of mediation (Hull, 2012b).The most classic way of dealing with documents is precisely to look through them, and not so much at them (Hull, 2012a, p.253), in order to produce ethnographic narratives about scenes, discourses and events that were not di- rectly observed by the researchers. That is, that were not registered in their field notes firsthand, but rather came to them previously documented by others (Vianna, 2014). Starting with the "historical turn" of the 1980s, the idea of an ethnography of/in archives (Castro and Cunha, 2005; Cunha, 2004 e 2005; Castro, 2008; Zeitlyn, 2012), in its mul- tiple modes and metaphorical extensions, became increasingly less exotic and more frequent.Since then, new methodological strategies have emerged for dealing with documents. As Zeitlyn (2012) discusses, one of these strategies is reading archives against the grain2, that is, subverting the modes of understanding that were imagined and intended by the administrative rationalities that produced and maintained them. This epistemo- logical posture led to the development of critical and imaginative approaches to traditional sources. Its main goals were to excavate subaltern and silenced voices, to rescue actions (or agencies), perceptions and small gestures of resistance from those situated at the margins of official records and, thus, to promote the "insurrection of subju- gated knowledges" (Foucault, 1980, p. 81).More recently, Stoler (2002, 2009) questioned how most colonial archive scholars could so quickly turn to readings against the grain without first moving along the grain. According to her, "assuming we know those scripts (...) dimin- ishes our analytic possibilities" (Id, 2002, p. 100). By analyzing the archive as a cultural artifact, she seeks to under- stand the perspectives and concerns of its producers and administrators, giving particular attention to conventions that shape what can and cannot be recorded: repetitions, acts of forgetfulness, different modes of silencing and the credibility hierarchies that delimit qualified and disqualified knowledges.By moving anthropological self-representations away from ethnography as "participant observation" or as writing, toward ethnography as modes of reading, these lessons from ethnographies of/in archives allow us to broaden the analytical possibilities of "current files"3 read during ethnographic field-work in contemporary bureaucratic organi- zations. As we will see, the combination of these two reading strategies (against and along the grain) in the ethnog- raphy of "human trafficking" inquiries seeks to render explicit the power relations that permeate the production of these documents and are fixated in these papers. At the same time, it seeks to turn documentary ethnography into a way to subvert the finality and logic of this administrative police procedure. In order to do so, we must remember that, as Hull (2012b) suggests, analytically restoring documents' visibility means treating them as mediators, that is, things that "transform, translate, dislocate, distort and modify the meaning or elements that they supposedly car- ry" (Latour, 2005, p.39).Restoring documents' visibility and mediation role, especially of those documents produced in bureaucratic organi- zations, has led recent ethnographies to explore the material dimension of this paperwork. These ethnographies, many of which are heirs to works that promoted important changes in the way that anthropology deals with ob- jects (cf. Appadurai, 1986; Miller, 2013), pursue not only modes of reading, but also carrying, handling and trading documents to their ultimate analytical consequences. They draw attention to what makes papers similar, in terms of their effects, to other equally ordinary artifacts from these institutional spaces. From this perspective, "for many genres of documents, it is often less important what they stand for than, like tables and desks, how they arrange people around themselves" (Hull, 2012b, p.134). It is therefore up to the ethnographer to face them as more than recording instruments used by bureaucrats and to apprehend in what way they constitute, hierarchize, separate and connect people.A paradigmatic example of this movement is Hull's ethnography in Pakistani bureaucratic offices, which explores the centrality of documents and documentation forms in Islamabad's governance (2012b). Working from the premise that the material qualities of governmental papers are not only elements mobilized in the production of meaning, but are also driving forces behind other types of processes, his work analyzes, among other issues, the relationships between carrying, signing and producing copies of documents and the diffusion of individual respon- sibilities in favor of a certain type of "collective agency". Navaro-Yashin (2007), in turn, emphasizes the mutually constitutive relationship between producing, exchanging and transforming documents and the affects retained, transported and experimented by those who handle them. In Brazil, the pioneer and crucial works by Peirano (1986, 2006a, 2006b, 2009) have long drawn attention to the fact that the possession of documents has the capaci- ty, in certain situations, to performatively make the citizen. For identification documents, according to the author, this capacity is largely derived from the redundancy between material elements found in them, such as the docu- mented persons' signature, 3X4 photo and fingerprint (cf. Peirano, 2006a, p. 36).The growing attention to the materiality of documents in ethnographic works has thus shed light on the fact that papers and forms, as well as photos, signatures, seals, stamps and other graphic artifacts4 regularly used in bu- reaucratic organizations, play a role both in controlling and coordinating procedures, agents and administrative ac- tions and in constructing subjectivities, affects, persons and relationships that extrapolate organizational universes. Thus, ethnographies that pay attention to these artifacts, and not only to what can be seen through them, have made clear that document production, circulation and archival must not be viewed as isomorphic to the organiza- tional structures in which they take place. They have also illuminated the socialities and entanglements that these processes produce, as well as the borders they are able, at times, to cross and, at others, to reaffirm.Following the trail established by these works and exploring the materiality of documents in a research on police reports of "missing persons"5 we are able to ascertain responsibilities, obligations and affects that are created by the production, circulation and archival of police reports and other papers brought together as inquiries within a sector of the Rio de Janeiro Civil Police. In this context, boundaries between what would be police responsibilities and what are considered attributions of "families of missing persons" are both produced and traversed by the pa- pers handled by police officers. Furthermore, in this context, documents covered by certain signatures and stamps function as conditions of possibility for establishing certain socialities, among which the one established between the researcher and her interlocutors.We will now present the reasons for, and analytical profitability of, our choice to "follow the paper" (Hull, 2012b, p.22) inscribing them within the broader context of these theoretical-methodological discussions. This choice is pre- sented for the two studies already discussed: the study in a Brazilian Federal Police precinct that sought to under- stand administrative practices and rationalities responsible for constructing and managing the crime of "human trafficking for sexual exploitation"; and the study carried out in a sector of the Rio de Janeiro Civil Police that sought to analyze how "missing person" cases are managed in Brazilian police units. Both ethnographies pay particular at- tention to the micro-politics of interactions between documenters and the documented subjects.The art of "reducing to writing": along and against the grain of a police inquiryAs some authors have pointed out, we cannot mistake the inquiry for the police investigation (Misse, 2011; Vidal, 2013). The inquiry's main goal is to ascertain that a particular criminal action took place and to establish its author- ship. It is a "piece composed of technical reports, accounts recorded by a notary public and a legally-oriented re- port, signed by a police commissioner with a degree in Law" (Misse, 2011, p.19). It is also, however, an instrument through which the police investigative work is formalized and officialized6. As legal jargon puts it, "what isn't in the documents isn't in the world", so that an undocumented investigation is as if it had not existed.If the inquiry is the artifact through which the Federal Police's investigative and administrative actions become legi- ble and real before their own artificers, ethnographing these practices requires that one follows the paper. The initial idea was to approach these documents as a means to understanding the administrative rationalities responsible for constructing and managing the "human trafficking" crime and its respective social characters ("traffickers" and "trafficked persons"). This meant reading them along the grain. However, it gradually became clear that the process of producing, dislocating and fixing official and unofficial conceptions of "human trafficking" in police inquiries did not only depend on the performances of their multiple documenters, but also of the people being documented. In order to understand how the alleged "victims" of this crime construct "spaces of agency" (Piscitelli, 2013) within cer- tainly asymmetrical interactions with state apparatuses, one had to simultaneously read the inquiries against the grain.In this sense, the ethnography of "human trafficking" inquiries establishes a dialogue with other works that, in- stead of a "victimizing" perspective, suggest giving voice to the experiences of people who participate in these mo- bilities, making it possible to confront their narratives with hegemonic accounts about them (Agustín, 2005; Piscitel- li, 2008). Based on this confrontation, research has shown that these migrants' trajectories generally do not fit the myths and stereotypes disseminated by the media and anti-trafficking campaigns (Piscitelli, 2008; Teixeira; 2008; Blanchette e Silva, 2010).This suggestion is in line with the police perception of the phenomenon, so much so that they most often charac- terized "human trafficking" less in terms of its legal definition than based on a contrast with what they assumed "outsider" interlocutors (including the researcher) expected of this crime.Almost all federal police officers heard during the research began conversation by alerting the researcher that there were few inquiries on this crime. They seemed not to assign much relevance to the subject, partly because they considered the investigations fruitless. "Sometimes the investigation turns up nothing because, simply, there is nothing. Just because an inquiry was started does not mean that there is a crime", one commissioner points out. "There's plenty of revenge-hotline", according to the agents, who claim that people use the Public Security Office's "Crime-hotline" in order to harm someone because of some conflict or personal enmity. However, police officers were unanimous in considering that the biggest difficulty in "human trafficking" cases is that "victims" don't see themselves as such, which reveals that authorities assign them the co-responsibility for elucidating (or not) the crime. As one of the agents put it: "usually the victims deny everything. They don't deny it only when they are very badly harmed. Then they come clean. But usually they deny it, because they do well out of it."One commissioner claims not to like to work with this type of crime because no one wants to cooperate with the investigation. He says the "victims" are a sort of "accomplice to the crime", that is, they collude with and protect the criminal. He states that the "victim" is almost always aware of the risks, chooses to engage in sex work and wants to go abroad where she has the opportunity to earn more. Thus, they seek to differentiate the reality of "human traf- ficking" found in police investigations from the idealized representations according to which "trafficked persons" would be deceived as to the purpose of their dislocation and/or forced into prostitution, emphasizing their consent and agency in order to deconstruct the idea of violence, even when they acknowledge the "typical conduct", that is, defined and criminalized in criminal law.However, instead of discussing the agency of alleged "victims" in their migratory and mobility projects, as empha- sized by some academic research on the subject and as noted by the police officers, we want to propose a different analytical focus and consider their agency in the face of state administrative apparatuses. This implies, on the one hand, taking into account the foucauldian suggestion that subjects are constituted ("subjectified") amidst a multi- plicity of correlations of force, through dynamics of subjection and resistance, both of which are equally important in thinking about the notion of agency (Mahmood, 2006). On the other hand, one must remember that, in state bu- reaucracies, documents are privileged means of diffusing responsibility and of producing collective agency (Hull, 2012b), or, in this case, an agency shared between documenting agents and documented persons.Without losing sight of the asymmetrical nature of this relationship in analyzing individual performances, the possi- bility of observing interactions between individuals and the "State" (as an administrative apparatus) means that the Federal Police, as a field for research, is a productive space in which to further the reflection on the potentialities of the concept of agency. Agency here is never understood as free will and not necessarily viewed as resistance, but rather "in an anthropological sense, as the socially and culturally mediated capacity for action" (Piscitelli, 2013, p.22). What is noticeable is that alleged "trafficked persons", based on the relative authority they are given as privi- leged "witnesses" in these police inquiries, manipulate information according to their own interests. Thereby, they usually resist the criminalizing/victimizing process, since they rarely report on, or contribute to establishing the ve- racity of the offense of which they are, in theory, "victims".Based on the premise that writing is one of the most important state activities and government technologies (Gup- ta, 2012; Das, 2007), the ethnography of police documentation practices aims to observe how these persons' state- ments are "reduced to writing"7 in police inquiries, as well as to render clear the regulating structures that govern these discursive formations and deformations. The so-called "Term of statements" is the main type of bureaucratic writing that guarantees that discourses of alleged victims (converted into "witnesses") "subsist and, at the same time, regularly change" (Foucault, 2014, p.159) throughout processes of document production and superposition.Statements "reduced to a term", which are enunciated amidst the embarrassment of police "interviews", are regis- tered in a formally rigorous document, marked by repeated narrative conventions and a legal form of its own. Con- verting oral speech into writing, in this case, means reducing and substituting answers given by questioned per- sons with the interrogator's indirect discourse. The questions are silenced and only signaled through the generic formulation "when inquired about the facts, ANSWERED: THAT...", situated at the beginning of the document, after the date, place, deponent's complete "qualification"8 and the name of the police officer who presided over the inter- view. At the end, the term must be read and signed by all (deponent, police commissioner and registrar), attesting its trustworthiness and making it official.Reading "Terms of statements" and their ramifications along the grain of "human trafficking" inquiries showed how the margin of agency of witnesses and suspects is only reduced in documentation procedures when their versions are confronted with the "social force" of other documents (Ferreira, 2013), such as transcripts of phone taps. Ob- serving a police interview in person, in turn, enabled the researcher to follow the police art of "reducing to term"9 in action and, thus, to understand and subvert the discursive formations and deformations that this type of bureau- cratic writing produces.Furthermore, observing police interviews in persons also enabled the researcher to comprehend the micro-politics of interactions between documenting agents and documented persons. To present these micro-politics, we will now describe the production and the uses of some documents, part of one of the few inquiries included in the research that did establish that the "human trafficking" crime took place and who its authors were10. This inquiry was initiat- ed based on a "letter rogatory" that formalized an international cooperation request, noting the participation of a Brazilian citizen in a criminal group that brought women from Brazil to Portugal to engage in sex work. Most mem- bers of the group had already been arrested and convicted in Europe, not for "human trafficking", but for the crimes of "pimping" and "aiding illegal immigration" ? which reveals that individuals who were defined as "victims" in Brazil were viewed and treated as "undocumented immigrants" in Portugal. However, this divergence of classifi- cations is silenced over the course of the police inquiry, without damaging diplomatic relationships that were estab- lished and renewed by the international circulation of official documents.The only accused who lived in Brazil was "indicted"11 in the Federal Police based on copies of documents extracted from the Portuguese inquiry and from a "Term of statements" produced by the Federal Prosecutor who received the request for international legal cooperation. Initially interrogated at the Federal Prosecutor's Office, the woman claimed to be a domestic worker and that she received financial assistance from a daughter who lived abroad, who was married to a Portuguese man and whose pay came from the beverages consumed by customers she accompa- nied at the nightclub where she worked. The document further notes that the woman claimed her daughter did not engage in sex work, but was unable to say whether or not there were any sex workers at the nightclub. She also as- sured the officer that she had never discussed any subject involving sending Brazilian women abroad for purposes of sex work over the phone with her son-in-law. The term closes with a description of the scene in which the sus- pect is emotionally destabilized by records of a phone call, followed by the bureaucratic demonstration that the Federal Prosecutor followed legal formalities:During the ethnographic fieldwork, the researcher also directly accompanied the process of producing the "Term of statements" of a "victim"/"witness" in the same police inquiry. Before beginning the "interview", the commissioner quickly analyzes the inquiry and marks the pages he considers most important to help him during questioning. The witness also appears carrying documents. Besides the copy of the summons, she brought along a folder with the lease of an apartment located in the city where she lived and the diploma of a beautician course she attended in Portugal. Since these papers did not contribute to establishing that the crime did (or did not) take place, only the personal identity documents required for making her presence in police headquarters official were examined and registered at the beginning of the "Term of statements".The commissioner was convinced about the purpose of her trip based on the Portuguese police inquiry. Thus, he merely sought to confirm and document how and by whom the young woman had been invited to travel, as well as to obtain her confession about engaging in sex work, a necessary condition for establishing that the crime took place. The witness, in turn, sought to protect her own reputation. If, by selecting what will and will not be recorded, the police officers are responsible for "simultaneously rendering certain accounts visible and invisible ? or audible and inaudible" (Vianna, 2014, p. 54), this does not mean that the documented person passively submits to the offi- cial documentation act. On the contrary, the deponent seeks to negotiate the choice of words and shape, up to a point, the architecture of the narrative that will be fixed on paper. Thus, the police inquiry can be read, against the grain, as a vehicle for her perspectives, experiences and aspirations, despite the evident deformations produced along the mediation process.The young woman, who seven years before had twice traveled to Portugal to work at the same commercial estab- lishment, recounted that, on the first time, her sister-in-law had told her that a friend had made a great deal of money at a "singles' bar", receiving 50% of the value of drinks offered to, and consumed by, customers. They decid- ed to leave together for Portugal because it was "just drinking". They were then introduced to an older woman (to- wards whom she evidently still felt anger) who was responsible for attracting women in Brazil and mediating the entire immigration process (obtaining a passport, buying plane tickets and contacting the club abroad). The com- missioner interrupts her, stating that it is of no use if it is not on paper. He then reads aloud everything that was recorded and asks that the young woman confirm the story and that she continue more slowly.The commissioner asks if there were "striptease" shows or rooms for sexual encounters at the bar, making explicit a suspicion that could have been previously ruled out had he read the inquiry documents more attentively. She de- nies, "no way, none of that! It was a bar", stating that customers went there only to drink and talk. "But the Por- tuguese are really dumb if they go to a nightclub and pay more just to talk!", the commissioner says, ironically. She corrects him, "it's not a nightclub, it's a bar", and then counters that in Brazil things might be different, but Por- tuguese men went there after companionship, because they were "needy", so much so that they would then want to have lunch, dinner, even marry the girls. She recounts that most of the Brazilian women married Portuguese men, including her sister-in-law, who was " happily married", and that she also lived for four years with a man she met at the "singles' bar" in Portugal. The dialog was translated by the police authority and thus "reduced to term" by the registrar:Despite the somewhat anxious and hurried tone, the woman seemed firm and sure of what she wanted to tell or not tell the police officers, trying to present the relationships' dynamics in her own terms. The first time, she trav- eled by her own initiative and paid her own tickets. That way, if she did not like it, she could leave. The second time, she at first did not wish to go, but the recruiter insisted. She then accepted a loan in order to buy the plane tickets, but settled her debt in one month because she was smart and did not drink, but rather pretended to, avoiding los- ing control so as not to be "swindled" during payment, which happened to the women who got drunk. The first part of the information was registered, but the more detailed explanations regarding the possibility of being swindled and her strategies of resistance were ignored and silenced. This does not mean that the commissioner wanted to erase the agency of so-called "trafficked women". On the contrary, he was emphatic in underlying her consent, even if by law that is irrelevant in configuring the "human trafficking" crime. Contrasting the concrete case with the idealized version of the crime, the officer notes:Retaining passports for the purpose of collecting debts, despite also not being a legal requirement in formally char- acterizing the "human trafficking" crime, is one of the most common images in political and media representations of the phenomenon, symbolizing the curtailment of freedom. It is worth noting, however, that for immigrants in an irregular situation, possessing a passport with an expired or wrong visa (tourist instead of work visa) does not pre- vent them from being viewed and treated as "undocumented". Stripped, after a few months, of its supposed power of performatively making the citizen (Peirano, 2006a), this document is converted, beyond national borders, into an "ephemeral object" (Navaro-Yashin, 2007), whose strength of materiality subsists only as a fetish of the Nation- state.The young woman questioned at the Federal Police recounts that singles' bar managers charged more or less dou- ble the value of the plane tickets, claiming this was done to cover other costs, such as free food and housing for the first weeks. The commissioner then interrupts her: "did they refrain from charging you if you arrived on time at the nightclub?". She answers she does not remember exactly. The commissioner tells the registrar that she vaguely re- members that she had to arrive by 6pm. She says she does not remember that. "That's why I said 'vaguely remem- bers'", the police officer offers as justification. He then reads a portion of the transcripts of a phone call that con- firmed this information:Still not satisfied, the commissioner makes one last attempt to extract from the alleged "victim" a confession capa- ble of establishing that the crime took place, saying all the clients questioned during the Portuguese investigations, including her ex-boyfriend, claimed the girls at the "club" engaged in sex work. The witness defends herself from the accusations: "If they did it, it was when they went out with the customers, when they went out to lunch or have dinner with them, or accompanied them to a mall and then, I don't know, maybe they went to a hotel... But I never did it and never knew of it". Insisting on her argument, she says: "do you understand? The woman had to go out with the customer until she won him over and married him, that's how I met my boyfriend and got together with him." Complementing what the young woman said with other information recorded in the inquiry documents (in other witnesses' "Terms of statements", in phone transcripts and Portuguese police and court reports), her expla- nations were thusly "translated to term":If, on the one hand, the "deponent's" answer denotes an effort to erase the more commercial dimension of sexual exchanges (prostitution), which was reintroduced by the commissioner through the decodification of her discourse fixed on paper, on the other, it reveals that relationships between singles' bar employees and customers did not al- ways fit the "prostitution" box, according to their own perspectives. The relationships established between men and women in these spaces were diverse and constituted a continuum of exchanges of sex, affection and money (Piscitelli et al, 2011) that ranged from commercial exchanges around the consumption of alcohol inside the club, included "going out" (which could involve actual prostitution or less formal and commercial meetings, such as an invitation to dinner), and went up to relationships and marriages.Before signing the document, the deponent reads everything attentively. She corrects a misspelled word and the value charged for the plane tickets. She confirms everything is "alright". The registrar prints out the "Term" once more and hands it to her so that she signs it. She re-reads the whole content and complains about the word "night- club". The registrar argues that, in Brazil, "nightclub" is a place that sells alcoholic beverages... She says "okay" and, then, finally signs and receives a copy of the "Term of statements". Before she leaves, she asks if she will be called again. The registrar says it is unlikely, "at least, not by the police".Going back to Ginsburg's (1991) analogy between inquisitors and anthropologists, reading these documents along and against the grain enables us not only to critically view this form of state documentation and administration, but also to rethink similar artifacts in anthropological knowledge practices, since the same analytical operations could be carried out toward the anthropologist, who silently witnessed and recorded this interaction. Furthermore, the analysis sought to draw attention to the fact that neither the "inquisitorial" character of interviews in police head- quarters, nor the re-shaping produced in the mediation process that converts witness speech into "Terms of state- ments" turn documented persons into inert objects of administrative documentation practices. It is not for nothing that these procedures rarely lead witnesses to report the crime of which they are supposedly "victims".To conclude this account we must highlight that, unlike the case chosen for analysis, most "human trafficking" in- quiries initiated in this Federal Police precinct led not so much to the construction than the deconstruction of the materiality of the crime (evidence). Thus, instead of leading to a criminal report and a judicial process, they general- ly wind up being archived by the Federal Prosecutor's Office. However, given that statistics are one of the main state narrative and administrative genres (Gupta, 2012), by moving from the documents' qualitative dimension to their quantitative effects, we can observe that their supposedly inexpressive result does not mean they "go nowhere", as the police officers used to say. In official reports about the phenomenon, the number of inquiries is more important than their content, serving as a support for policy formulation. Thus, the heterogeneity and "the messy details of cases are replaced by the precise factuality of numbers" (ibid, p. 156), which are the main criterion in measuring the productivity and effectiveness of this and other criminal policies.In this sense, the police inquiries' institutional ramifications, if evaluated beyond their criminal aspects, make clear how bureaucratic government is exercised not only through the articulation between knowledge and power (Fou- cault, 1980), but also through the everyday production of ignorance and even stupidity, in Graeber's (2012) terms. The political strength of ignorance can be perceived in the way in which so-called "quantitative data" is used at the highest levels of the state administrative hierarchy, which are responsible for formulating national reports and maintaining a dialogue with supranational government agencies. In Brazil, the low number of "human trafficking" inquiries and their low "productivity" in terms of criminal convictions are converted into uncertain statistics and policies of confrontation that are reproduced and legitimize themselves less through what is actually documented by state organs (such as the police) acting in the operational front lines to combat this crime than by the proclaimed need to improve the regulation of something that is imagined not to be duly documented.Inside and outside of drawers: relationships, feelings and commitments on paperIf we cannot mistake the police inquiry for the actual investigation, the same cannot be said about documents pro- duced in "missing persons" cases reported to the Rio de Janeiro Civil Police. In the state's precincts, every "missing person" case is the object of a "Verification of the Merits of the Information" (Verificação da Procedência da Infor- mação ? VPI), which consists of an administrative set of documents endowed with a different status from the in- quiry. Though it designates documents, the VPI was originally conceived and regulated by the Brazilian Criminal Code as a preliminary stage of all police investigation, which must precede the inquiry and determine whether or not it should be initiated. However, in the precincts' day-to-day routine, this expression came to name a set of pa- pers, establishing, in practice, a coincidence between investigative procedures and documents (cf. Eilbaum, 2012).12VPIs are not initiated only for "missing persons" cases, but for a variety of occurrences reported to the precincts. Nevertheless, the coincidence between procedures and documents implied in its name is emphasized here in order to introduce the reasons for, and effects of, the choice for dealing with documents in a research specifically con- cerned with "missing persons" cases.The research's main objective was to understand, through ethnographic fieldwork, how cases classified as "missing persons" are administered in Brazilian police units, apprehending both practices and representations about this
type of occurrence that are present in precincts. Initially, there was no predefined choice for the use of documents as artifacts based on which the ethnography would be constructed. Since the negotiations that made the research possible, however, it became imperative to deal with papers, given that, in that context, processes and documents maintain close and definitive relationships. Though extremely revealing, the implied coincidence found in the VPI initials is only one of these relationships."Missing persons" is, among so many others, a category used in Brazilian Civil Police precincts to name a specific type of occurrence. Cases of adults who leave their homes, jobs and routines without informing their whereabouts; public calamities, natural disasters and inclement weather episodes whose victims are not located; children and adolescents who run away from home, shelters or youth detention centers; elderly or mentally ill individuals who get lost in their own cities. Amongst many other, dramas, plots and characters like these constitute "missing per- sons" occurrences registered and investigated in VPIs. "Missing persons" cases are part of the universe of so-called "atypical facts" registered in precincts: events that are not established in Brazilian criminal law and, therefore, are not crimes (cf. Paes, 2008, p. 173).Ethnographic reflections on Brazilian public security and criminal justice have long shown that police officers hierar- chize occurrences with which they deal, adding to formal categories such as "occurrence", "missing persons" and "atypical fact" a series of informal classifications, labels and stereotypes (cf. Kant de Lima, 1995; Kant de Lima, Pires and Eilbaum, 2008; Miranda et al, 2010). One of these informal classifications is the one separating the so-called "feijoada"13, a set of occurrences considered to be of little relevance, such as threats, domestic disputes and thefts for which there is no evidence, from the so-called "actual crimes", that is, homicides, kidnappings and robberies, for example14. The research's initial objectives included the interest in understanding the place "missing persons" cas- es occupied in police officer's informal classifications.In order to approach this issue ethnographically, the researcher sought access to a sector of the Rio de Janeiro Civil Police that specializes in "missing persons" cases: the Sector for Discovering Whereabouts (Setor de Descoberta de Paradeiros ? SDP), part of the state capital's current Homicide Unit. During her first visit to the SDP, the researcher was greeted by the sector's then-interim chief, inspector Fernando, and quickly instructed to formally request an authorization to carry out the study. The authorization should be addressed to the office of the Rio de Janeiro Civil Police Chief. The researcher followed the instructions exactly and quickly, but the document only arrived at the of- fice after passing through different sectors of the Civil Police and receiving more than a dozen stamps and small notes on its margins until, finally, being inscribed with the short sentence that allowed the work to be carried out: "There are no objections to the researcher's academic aspirations."The need for not only a piece of paper, but one that circulated through several sectors of an organization at a pace independent of the anthropologist's wishes put her in contact with what is understood in Brazil to be the oppres- sive materialization of the ideals of formalism, impersonality and anonymity prevalent in bureaucracies: the in- escapable need for records, letterheads and signatures in order to set a process in motion or to obtain all manner of rights (cf. Reis, 1998 e DaMatta, 2002). Furthermore, the need for explicit authorization also made clear a key as- pect of the way in which bureaucratic organizations work: the imposition both of uncertainty and of waiting as an efficacious resource of power (cf. Hoag, 2011, p.86).Additionally, reading the short sentence that, at last, authorized the research presented the anthropologist with "an ethnographic fact even before reaching the 'field'" (Peirano, 2009, p.54). Reading documents became not only a rou- tine activity, but also an involving datum of the then-beginning fieldwork. Though the request had been deposited in an SDP drawer, from which it was only removed for inspection once, other papers, organized as VPIs, were rou- tinely removed from drawers and systematically read, transcribed and handled by the researcher. These acts, though very similar to what the police officers themselves did everyday, were seen by inspector Fernando and his col- leagues as almost opposite tasks to what could be seen there, should the anthropologist have decided to observe the sector's day-to-day routine.At the initial negotiation regarding the fieldwork routine, held between the researcher and inspector Fernando, the latter presented "observation" and "dealing with documents" as opposite options in terms of the effects they could produce on the SDP day-to-day routine. Immediately after the researcher stated that she intended to "observe the sector's day-to-day routine and talk with police officers", the inspector warned her: "that word observe will cause you trouble". According to Fernando, talking to police officers and observing their work would lead her to a cross- roads: either they would tell her what they do and ought to do in an idealized way and she would write something "pretty, but unrealistic", or she would write about what actually happens in a police unit, producing "realistic" work, but drawing the officers' animosity. He suggested, as a (in his words) "great alternative" to circumvent the cross- roads, that she turn her attention to the papers received, produced and stored in the SDP's drawers and lockers, what he and his colleagues referred to as "our archives". Research with documents, said Fernando, would be "easi- er".By referring to documentary research as a "great alternative", "easier" because it was dissociated from what was "real" in the day-to-day SDP activities, inspector Fernando expressed a graphic ideology (cf. Hull, 2012b) common among bureaucrats and other documenters. These agents "much like scientists, claim to represent, engage with, or constitute realities 'in the world' independent from the processes that produce documents." (Ib, 2012b, p.5). For Fernando, after all, while the researcher was dealing with documents produced and handled by himself and his col- leagues, she would not be observing what they "really" do. Furthermore, if this graphic ideology is present among all kinds of documenters, for SDP police officers specifically it is reinforced by two characteristics of the papers with which they deal. First, their status as administrative procedures and the lack of importance that follows from it. Sec- ond, the incongruence between material elements and narrative conventions present in these papers and the case plots registered therein.The specific VPIs that circulate within the SDP are initiated in Rio de Janeiro city police precincts. The precincts are first reported of "missing persons" cases by people classified by police officers, often regardless of factual connec- tions or blood ties, as "families of missing persons". Once a "family of missing person" reports a case in a precinct, a police officer must open a VPI. Some time after this initial step, VPIs must be forwarded to the SDP for specialized investigations15. Unlike police inquiries, VPIs are administrative procedures initiated for non-criminal occurrences. The central issue, however, is not their distinct nature but rather the different status attributed by police officers to VPIs and inquiries. Police officers, reproducing the hierarchy implicit in the distinction between "real crimes" and "feijoada", understand that inquiries are properly police documents and, thus, endowed with evident relevance, while VPIs are, in their words, "only administrative procedures", unimportant, incapable of revealing the "reality" of police work and, for this very reason, liable to being touched, read and transcribed even by a researcher16.Nonetheless, within the heterogeneous universe of VPIs, police officers understand that those initiated for "missing persons" cases are even less important than the rest. Using this other informal classification, that at times is added to the separation between "real crimes" and "feijoada", SDP police officers often state that "missing persons" cases are "family affairs", in opposition to "police matters". While homicides, kidnappings and robberies, among others crimes, are "police matters" demanding street operations, team investigations and other activities part of "police work", "missing persons" cases are, to sector agents, "family affairs" that should not be left up to police units. Police officers say that, when faced with these cases, they have little to do but "to fill out pieces of paper" (cf. Ferreira, 2013) and to tend to the so-called "families of missing persons", carrying out a type of service they classify as "social work"17.Inspector Fernando usually bases the use of informal classifications such as "family affairs" and "social work" on one of the main state narrative and administrative genres: official statistics, in this case produced by the Rio de Janeiro Public Security Institute (Instituto de Segurança Pública ? ISP). For some years, ISP has claimed, based on quantitative data that the majority of "missing persons" cases reported to the state's precincts end with the return of the missing persons to their homes or at least with the discovery of their whereabouts18. For Fernando, that data prove what he sees everyday: that most occurrences are family conflicts leading to someone running away from home, to couples separating or to one of the persons involved in the conflict explicitly deciding to leave home.These conflicts would erroneously arrive at police units, leaving officers like himself and his colleagues to "merely fill out pieces of paper" ? not any paper, but especially unimportant documents ? and await their resolution. None- theless, for Fernando, these numbers also lead to SDP's work being "an illusion": while he and his colleagues "mere- ly fill out pieces of paper", most cases are solved and counted as such, which enables their superiors in the state hierarchy to use numbers suggesting the SDP is an efficient service for locating missing persons. What the num- bers do not show, however, is that many cases are solved because the missing person voluntarily returns home, and not as a result of successful investigations.A clear incongruence between the material elements of the VPI documents and the cases plots also accompany this "illusion" produced by quantitative data and the lack of importance attributed to the papers. This incongruence adds to the VPIs' inferiority the idea that they are ineffective documents in terms of investigations, reinforcing the "illusory" character of SDP's work. They both lead to the production of vague and imprecise records of the cases and the choice, by many police officers, to leave fields blank or to fill them out with expressions such as "ignored", "unknown", "does not know", among others.Reports of occurrences, official correspondence, and "terms of statements", among other documents included in VPIs, contain inscriptions and insignias of the Rio de Janeiro Civil Police and/or the precincts and sectors in which they are produced, as well as categories, fields for certain kinds of information and narrative conventions that are exhaustively repeated. Categories such as "author", "victim", "witness", "location of occurrence", "date and time of occurrence" and "goods involved", for example, appear in the police reports, guiding the work of every police offi- cer who fills out this documents when faced with a case ? whether or not it is a "missing persons" case. In "terms of statements", official correspondence, dispatches and subpoenas, as well as in some reports, some of these cate- gories must be filled out, juxtaposed with fields where information about the "victim", such as "name", "parents' name", "occupation", "race" and "age", must be registered. If these categories appear repeatedly and even redun- dantly in the documents, at the same time there is no space for photos of those involved to be attached, nor for physical descriptions beyond the "race" attributed to them.The inescapable presence of these categories and fields in the documents, as well as the lack of space for photos and physical descriptions of those involved, are material elements of VPIs that are incompatible with "missing per- sons" plots. "Missing persons" plots are not crimes and, therefore, it is not possible to speak of "authors", "victims" and "witnesses", at least not with the meaning assigned to these categories in criminal occurrences. Furthermore, a persons' "disappearance" cannot be narratively treated as an "occurrence" that took place at a certain "place", "date and time" and in front of certain people. What can be said about a "disappearance", instead, is only the place where the "missing person" was last seen by others who came to view them as "missing" based on a moment or process that may have no connection with events situated in time and space.For this reason, photos of "missing" persons, graphic artifacts that are usually taken by their "families" to the precincts where they report the cases, are frequently glued, in a manner at once improvised and already standard- ized, at the edges of papers included in the VPIs. In most cases, this is done at the upper right corner of police re- ports, where there are no insignias or inscriptions that would be obscured by the images. Physical descriptions of the "missing persons", including information about the clothes they were wearing when they were last seen, strik- ing facial features and marks or tattoos they may have, are registered in fields meant not for information about persons, but rather for descriptions of the so-called "dynamics of the occurrence".As Paes (2008) exemplarily describes, the process of filling out documents in precincts is precisely characterized by improvisations, alterations and subversions of what categories and fields such as "dynamics of the occurrence" seem to presuppose, such as those employed in "missing persons" cases in order to include photos and physical descriptions of the "missing" in the VPIs. These improvisations and subversions often become fixed patterns of recording, as revealed, for example, by the practice of filling out the "dynamics of the occurrence" field not with in- formation about the occurrence, but rather with accounts of activities carried out by the police officers since be- coming aware of it.This practice, just as other patterns of recording used in precincts, are interpreted by Paes (2008) and Miranda et al (2010) as effects of the not only inquisitorial, but also notary system that orients police actions in Brazil. As a result of this system, "the logic of the document that must be registered and filed precedes the logic of the record as a resource for the investigation" (Paes, 2008, p.175). In records about "missing persons", this logic of documents that must be filled out, even despite incongruences between their material elements and the cases' plots, ends up rein- forcing the lack of importance attributed VPIs. Moreover, it also ends up endowing "missing persons" cases with an enigmatic character that results not from the cases themselves, but from the imprecision provoked by those incon- gruences19. Furthermore, it also reinforces the idea that "missing persons" cases are not "police matters", since even the papers routinely filled out, which are the most trivial part of a precinct's routine, are shown to be inade- quate in the face of their characteristics, plots and characters.Despite being considered unimportant, and despite the incongruence between their material elements and the plots of occurrences therein registered, documents on "missing persons" cases play a crucial role in the way police agents and units such as SDP manage these cases. By systematically reading the documents, the researcher was able to understand that much of the content recorded in these papers points not to what happened during the "dis- appearance", but rather to a process of delegating responsibilities put in motion by the production and circulation of documents itself. If, for officers like inspector Fernando, "missing persons" cases are "family affairs", in "merely filling out pieces of paper" about these cases those agents delegate responsibilities for managing and even solving them to the so-called "families of missing persons".Based on what they record, how they record it and the fact that what they record is set in police documents ? de- spite their own conceptions regarding the "social work" nature of the activities demanded by "missing persons" cas- es ?, police officers attribute tasks such as looking for those "missing", controlling their movements and even stop- ping them from disappearing again to the very persons who went to precincts to request that they, the officers, would perform these tasks. As the three cases we will now present show, in filling out documents, the officers re- turn to the "families" the responsibility for managing the cases, through advice and suggestions given both verbally and through the documents' texts themselves. These suggestions and advice are responded by the "families" with commitments, feelings and obligations that are also registered in VPIs and, thus, deposited in the SDP's so-called "archives", to be known by anyone who dares open their drawers.Let us then discuss the cases involving Arlete, Cinira and Melissa, three young women who were reported as "miss- ing" and whose cases, all solved, are currently in the sector's drawers. The excerpts of the cases reveal guidance, advice and suggestions given by police officers to the "families" of the three "missing" women, while also revealing commitments, feelings and obligations provoked both in these "families" and in the "missing" women themselves by the guidance, advice and suggestions fixed on paper. Let's begin with Arlete.On January 7, 2008, Regina, a domestic worker, left early for work, as usual. She returned at the usual time and found her 16-year-old daughter, Arlete, watching TV. The two had dinner together and then Regina went to bed, "leaving her daughter awake, and her daughter said she was going to her friend Ana's house and would sleep there". The following day, she worked as usual, but, upon returning home, did not find Arlete.In the next four days, Regina followed her routine, hoping to find Arlete every night. This did not happen. On Jan- uary 12, she went to a precinct and obtained a record of her daughter's "disappearance". Almost a month later, she was once again at the precinct, this time to inform of the opposite: Arlete had returned home. Though already solved, in June 2008 the case was sent to the SDP. Before archiving it, the police officer who received it saw fit to call Regina and end the case with the following log:Something similar happened with Melissa, a 14-year-old student who was used to spending a day or two away from home without informing anyone. In April 2008, she spent three days without contacting any family members and her mother decided to seek the police. At the time, a "missing person" report was made for Melissa. A week later, her mother returned to the unit and reported that she was already home. Based on her account, the officer who took her report registered:The last case is somewhat richer in detail. Cinira was a 19-year-old college student who left the house where she lived with her mother and sister and returned ten days later. As soon as she returned, Cinira herself went to the po- lice precinct where her "missing" had been first reported. The records of the "missing" person's visit to the police precinct are similar to those of Arlete and Melissa's cases: they fix on paper commitments with controlling behav- iors. In Cinira's case, however, they are commitments to self-control and to what would be a good conduct toward herself, and not others, as in Arlete's and Melissa's cases.What Cinira said to the police officer was thus recorded:The "beating" in Arlete's case, the guilt, the regret and the commitments to control her own desires, feelings and conduct in Cinira's, and the obligation to punish her daughter for her behavior, in Melissa's mother's case are ef- fects of advice, suggestions and guidance provided by police officers in their interactions with "families of missing persons" who seek precincts to report "missing persons" cases. An example of this kind of guidance is the sugges- tion to provide Arlete with an I.D., not only stated by the officer who took her mother's report, but also registered in the case's VPI.It is precisely through the articulation between advice, suggestions and guidance such as this one and the commit- ments, feelings and obligations they provoke in the so-called "families" that police officers manage "missing per- sons" cases reported to Rio de Janeiro precincts. If, from these agents' point of view, "missing persons" cases are "family affairs", it is precisely the "families" that end up managing them, through "beatings", guilt and commit- ments fixed on documents considered to be the least relevant in police units. Furthermore, what is particularly in- teresting is that this mode of management becomes effective because it finds its way on paper, starkly revealing that official documents "bear the double sign of the state's distance and its penetration into the life of the every- day" (Das and Poole, 2004, p.15).On the trail of police papers: ethnographic dialogues and final considerationsIn this article, we sought less to compare our "fieldwork" data than to render clear the profitability of documents in anthropological research. We did so by proposing a dialogue between recent theoretical-methodological discus- sions on the theme and two ethnographic accounts of studies carried out on the trail of police papers. Based on the option to deal with documents, our ethnographies addressed the notary character that is widely criticized in the lit- erature about Brazilian police units (Kant de Lima, 1995; Miranda et al, 2010; Misse, 2011, Vidal, 2013) in its positivi- ties. That is, instead of associating documentation practices with an alleged inefficiency that would prevent police investigations from being properly carried out, we sought to seriously consider the idea that writing is one of the most important activities and government technologies of state routines (Gupta, 2012; Das, 2007) and to explore its analytical potentiality. Thus, we argue that in order to understand police administration of "human trafficking for sexual exploitation" and "missing persons" cases we had to follow the paper and produce reflections that ques- tioned the tediousness, lack of symbolic richness and density of meaning attributed to documents (cf. Graeber, 2012).In following the paperwork routinely produced and handled by federal and state police officers, we could observe that they assign less importance to the documentation work they perform, whether by pointing out the inefficacy (or unimportance) of inquiries that "turn up nothing" or differentiating the activity of "merely filling out pieces of paper" from the investigative practices they should ideally privilege. Thus, they frequently delimit borders and hier- archies very similarly to how anthropologists traditionally conceived of and defined ethnographic practices: oppos- ing dealing with documents with "real" police work, characterized by street investigations and geared toward "actu- al crimes".As we know, the legitimacy and authority of anthropology, anchored in the mythic model of the malinowskian field- work, were founded on an opposition between "armchair anthropology", based on documentary research and con- sidered distant and uninteresting, and an anthropology emanating from fieldwork, understood to be capable of ap- prehending the "reality" of native life. Considering this analogy's potentialities, we note that if, on the one hand, our ethnographic accounts showed the central role of documentary artifacts in the everyday routine of police insti- tutions, even when their importance is downplayed by their artificers, on the other, they revealed the little-debated distance between certain idealized self-representations about anthropological research and the activities we effec- tively carry out while "doing" anthropology (cf. Pacheco de Oliveira, 2009).By following the trail of police papers and moving away from certain stereotypes about anthropology's knowledge practices and about the arti facts we ought to observe, handle and describe when carrying out fieldwork, both ac- counts made clear and were based on different analytical strategies. The first focused on the ethnographic descrip- tion of the art of "reducing to writing" in the Federal Police. The second focused on exploring the materiality and the enactments produced by police reports and other documentary artifacts related to "missing persons" cases in the Rio de Janeiro Civil Police. Both works paid special attention to the micro-politics of interactions between docu- menting agents and documented persons, also enabling reflections about the interaction between documenting agents and one of the researchers.By regarding documents as ethnographic artifacts, we were able to note that the resolution (or lack thereof ) of the cases investigated in the institutions where we carried out our researches depends not only on the action (or inac- tion) of their artificers, but also on different modes of delegating responsibilities to the documented persons. This is due to the fact that police officers believe they do not have much to do when faced with these cases other than producing papers, acknowledging the agency of persons technically defined as "trafficked" or "missing" over man- aging their own lives and bodies. Both analyses also revealed that this delegation of responsibilities guarantees to documented persons the possibility of actively intervening in the bureaucratic fate of administrative procedures and/or in the inscriptions of part of their lives in state documents.The diffusion of responsibility, which produces a kind of collective agency, as noted by Hull (2012b), or shared agency, as we suggest, occurs through paper ? something that was prominent throughout the accounts. The main difference is that, in "human trafficking" cases, the documented persons' agency takes on the form of resistance, while in "missing persons" cases, the agency takes place through a logic of subjection. We highlight that both pro- cesses are crucial to understanding the notion of agency, as Mahmood (2006) suggests. In our studies, we were only able to understand and analyze these different modes of agency, that are given form and materiality on paper and whose effects can be perceived through the bureaucratic fates of these administrative procedures, once we de- cided to analytically pursue the mediations and enactments which follow the processes of producing, circulating and archiving police documents.Received 12th August, 2014, approved 20th September 2013ReferencesAGUSTÍN, Laura. 2005. "Migrants in the mistress's house: other voices in the 'trafficking' debate". Social Politics, 12(1): 96-117APPADURAI, Arjun. 1986. The social life of things Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.ARAÚJO, Fábio Alves. 2008. "Falta alguém na minha casa". In: R. Kant de Lima (org.), Antropologia e direitos humanos 5 Brasília: Booklink/ ABA/ Fundação Ford. pp. 166-225.ARAÚJO, Fabio Alves. 2012. Das consequências da "arte" macabra de fazer desaparecer corpos: sofrimento, violência e política entre familiares de vítimas de desaparecimento forçado Tese de doutorado, Programa de Pós Graduação em Sociologia e Antropologia da Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, IFCS/UFRJ.BLANCHETTE, Thaddeus Gregory ; SILVA, Ana Paula da. 2010. "Mulheres vulneráveis e meninas más: uma análise antropológica de narrativas hegemônicas sobre o tráfico de pessoas no Brasil". In: Ademir Pacelli Ferreira et al. (orgs.), A experiência migrante: entre deslocamentos e reconstruções Rio de Janeiro: Garamond. pp. 325-359BRASIL. Decreto-Lei 2.848, de 7 de dezembro de 1940 – Código Penal (CP). 1940.BRASIL. Decreto-Lei 3.699, de 3 de outubro de 1941 – Código de Processo Penal (CPP). 1941.CASTRO, Celso. 2008. Pesquisando em arquivos Rio de Janeiro: Jorge Zahar.CASTRO, Celso.; CUNHA, Olívia Maria Gomes da. 2005. "Quando o campo é o arquivo". Estudos Históricos, 36: 3- 5.CLIFFORD, James; MARCUS, George (eds.). 1986. Writing culture: the poetics and politics of ethnography Berkeley & Los Angeles: University of California Press.COMAROFF, Jean; COMAROFF, John. 1991. Of revelation and revolution Volume 1: Christianity, colonialism and consciousness in South Africa. Chicago: University Chicago Press.CUNHA, Olívia Maria Gomes da. 2004. "Tempo imperfeito: uma etnografia do arquivo". Mana. Estudos de Antropologia Social, 10(2): 287-322.CUNHA, Olívia Maria Gomes da. 2005. "Do ponto de vista de quem? Diálogos, olhares e etnografias dos/nos arquivos". Estudos Históricos, 26: 7-32.DAMATTA, Roberto. 2002. "A mão visível do Estado: notas sobre o significado cultural dos documentos na sociedade brasileira". Anuário Antropológico, 99: 37-67.DAS, Veena; Poole, Deborah. 2004. "State and its margins: comparative ethnographies". In: Veena Das e Deborah Poole (eds.), Anthropology in the margins of the State Santa Fe: SAR Press. pp. 3-33.DAS, Veena; Poole, Deborah. 2007. "The signature of the State: the paradox of illegibility". In: Veena Das. Life and words: violence and the descent into the ordinary Berkeley: University of California Press. pp.162-183.EILBAUM, Lucía. 2012. "O bairro fala": conflitos, moralidades e justiça no conurbano bonaerense São Paulo: Hucitec/ANPOCS.EVANS-PRITCHARD, E. E. 1950. "Social anthropology: past and present, The Marett Lecture, 1950". Man, 50: 118- 124.FERREIRA, Letícia Carvalho de Mesquita. 2011. Uma etnografia para muitas ausências: o desaparecimento de pessoas como ocorrência policial e problema social Doctoral dissertation, PPGAS, Museu Nacional, UFRJ, Rio de Janeiro.FERREIRA, Letícia Carvalho de Mesquita. 2013. "'Apenas preencher papel': reflexões sobre registros policiais de desaparecimento de pessoa e outros documentos". Mana: Estudos de Antropologia Social, 19(1): 39-68.FOUCAULT, Michel. 2014. A arqueologia do saber Rio de Janeiro: Forense Universitária. 8a ed.FOUCAULT, Michel. 1980. Power/knowledge: selected interviews and other writings, 19721977 Brighton, UK: Harvester.GINZBURG, Carlo. 1991. "O inquisidor como antropólogo: uma analogia e as suas implicações". In: A micro- história e outros ensaios Rio de Janeiro: Bertrand. pp. 203-214.GRAEBER, David. 2012. "Dead zones of the imagination. On violence, bureaucracy, and interpretive labor". HAU: Journal of Ethnographic Theory, 2(2): 105128.GUPTA, Akhil. 2012. Red tape: bureaucracy, structural violence and poverty in India Durham and London: Duke Univerty Press.HARTMAN, Saidiya V. 1997. Scenes of subjection: terror, slavery and self-making in nineteenth-century America New York, Oxford: Oxford University Press.HOAG, Collin. 2011. "Assembling partial perspectives: thoughts on the anthropology of bureaucracy". PoLAR: Political and Legal Anthropology Review, 34(1): 81-94.HULL, Matthew. 2012a. "Documents and bureaucracy. Annual Review of Anthropology, 41: 251-267.HULL, Matthew. 2012b. "Government of paper: the materiality of bureaucracy in urban Pakistan" Berkeley, Los Angeles, London: University of California Press.ISP INSTITUTO DE SEGURANÇA PÚBLICA. Pesquisa desaparecidos Available at: http://www.isp.rj.gov.br. Access on: 29 December 2009.JARDIM, Tarciso Dal Maso. 2011. Brasil condenado a legislar pela Corte Interamericana de Direitos Humanos: da obrigação de tipificar o crime de desaparecimento forçado de pessoas Brasília: Centro de Estudos da Consultoria do Senado/Textos para discussão, n. 83.LATOUR, Bruno. 2005. Reassembling the social: an introduction to actor-network-theory Oxford: Oxford University Press.LATOUR, Bruno; WOOLGAR, Steve. 1997. A vida de laboratório: a produção dos fatos científicos (Trad. Angela R. Vianna). Rio de Janeiro: Relume DumaráLOWENKRON, Laura. 2012. O monstro contemporâneo: a construção social da pedofilia em múltiplos planosDoctoral dissertation. PPGAS, Museu Nacional, UFRJ, Rio de Janeiro.LOWENKRON, Laura. 2014. Gênero, fronteiras e Estado: a construção do tráfico de pessoas em investigações e inquéritos policiais Relatório de pesquisa de pós-doutoramento apresentado à Fundação de Amparo à Pesquisa do Estado de São Paulo (FAPESP), (processo n? 2012/11629-4), março de 2014.MAHMOOD, Saba. 2006. "Teoria feminista, agência e sujeito liberatório: alguma reflexões sobre o revivalismo islâmico no Egipto". Etnográfica, X(1): 121-158.MILLER, Daniel. 2013. Trecos, troços e coisas: estudos antropológicos sobre a cultura material Rio de Janeiro: Zahar.MIRANDA, Ana Paula Mendes de et al. 2010. "A reinvenção da 'cartorialização': análise do trabalho policial em registros de ocorrência e inquéritos policiais em 'Delegacias Legais' referentes a homicídios dolosos na cidade do Rio de Janeiro. Segurança, Justiça e Cidadania, 4: 119-152.MISSE, Michel. 2011. "O papel do inquérito policial no processo de incriminação no Brasil: algumas reflexões a partir de uma pesquisa". Revista Sociedade e Estado, 26(1): 15-27.NAVARO-YASHIN, Yael. 2007. "Make-believe papers, legal forms and the counterfeit: affective interactions between documents and people in Britain and Cyprus". Anthropological Theory, 7: 79-98.PACHECO DE OLIVEIRA, João. 2009. "Pluralizando tradições etnográficas: sobre um certo mal-estar na antropologia". Cadernos do Leme, 1(1): 2-27.PAES, Vivian Ferreira. 2008. "'Quem domina a regra do jogo': sobre a reforma da polícia e os registros policiais". In: Michel Misse (org.), Acusados & acusadores: estudos sobre ofensas, acusações e incriminações Rio de Janeiro: FAPERJ/Editora Revan. pp. 165-186.PEIRANO, Mariza. 1986. "Sem lenço, sem documento". Sociedade e Estado, 1: 49-63.PEIRANO, Mariza. 2006a. "De que serve um documento?" In: M. Palmeira; César Barreira (orgs.), Política no Brasil: visões de antropólogos Rio de Janeiro: Relume Dumará, NuAP/UFRJ. pp. 25-49.PEIRANO, Mariza. 2006b. "A lógica múltipla dos documentos". In: A teoria vivida e outros ensaios de antropologiaRio de Janeiro: Jorge Zahar Editor. pp. 135-153.PEIRANO, Mariza.2009. "O paradoxo dos documentos de identidade". Horizontes Antropológicos, 32: 53-80.PISCITELLI, Adriana. 2013. Trânsitos: brasileiras nos mercados transnacionais do sexo Rio de Janeiro: Eduerj.PISCITELLI, Adriana. 2008. "Entre as 'máfias' e a 'ajuda': a construção de conhecimento sobre tráfico de pessoas". Cadernos Pagu, 31: 29-63.PISCITELLI, Adriana; ASSIS, Gláucia Oliveira de; OLIVAR, José Miguel Nieto (orgs.). 2011. Gênero, sexo, amor e dinheiro: mobilidades transnacionais envolvendo o Brasil Campinas: Unicamp/ PAGU.REED, Adam. 2006. "Documents unfolding". In: A. Riles (ed.), Documents: artifacts of modern knowledge Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press. pp. 158-177.REIS, Elisa Pereira. 1998. "Opressão burocrática: o ponto de vista do cidadão". In: Processos e escolhas Rio de Janeiro: Contra Capa Livraria. pp. 239-269.RILES, Annelise. 2006. "Introduction: In Response". In: A. Riles (ed.), Documents: artifacts of modern knowledgeAnn Arbor: University of Michigan Press. pp. 1-37.RILES, Annelise. 2001. The network inside out Ann Arbor: The Michigan University Press.RIO DE JANEIRO. 1991. Secretaria de Estado de Segurança Pública. Resolução SEPC 513 de 16 de dezembro de 1991. Rio de Janeiro: Secretaria de Estado de Segurança Pública.SOUZA LIMA, Antonio Carlos de. 1995. Um grande cerco de paz: poder tutelar, indianidade e formação do Estado no Brasil Petrópolis: Vozes.STOLER, Ann Laura. 2009. Along the archival grain: epistemic anxieties and colonial common sense Princeton: Princeton University Press.STOLER, Ann Laura. 2002. "Colonial archives and the art of governance". Archival Science, 2: 87109.TEIXEIRA, Flavia do Bonsucesso. 2008. "L'Italia dei Diveti: entre o sonho de ser europeia e o babado da prostituição". Cadernos Pagu, 31: 275-308.VIANNA, Adriana. 2014. "Etnografando documentos: uma antropóloga em meio a processos judiciais". In: Sérgio R. R. Castilho; Antonio Carlos de Souza Lima; Carla C. Teixeira (orgs.), Antropologia das práticas de poder: reflexões etnográficas entre burocratas, elites e corporações Rio de Janeiro: Contra Capa. pp. 43-70.VIDAL, Paula Chagas Lessa. 2013. "Os donos do carimbo": investigação policial como procedimento escrito Rio de Janeiro: Lumen Juris.ZEITLYN, David. 2012. "Anthropology in and of the archives: possible futures and contigent pasts. Archives as anthropological surrogates". Annual Review of Anthropology, 41: 461-80.1This crime is defined in article 231 of the Brazilian criminal code: "to promote or facilitate the entry, into national territory, of someone who will engage in prostitution or other form of sexual exploitation within it, or the exit of someone who will engage in these activities abroad. Sentence ? incarceration for three (3) to eight (8) years. § 1 The same sentence applies to anyone who obtains the services of, entices or buys a trafficked person, as well as, being aware of this condition, transports, transfers or harbors them. § 2 The sentence is increased by half if: I ? the victim is under eighteen (18) years of age; II ? if the victim, due to illness or mental disability, lacks the necessary judgment to engage in the act; III ? if the perpetrator is the victim's parent, step-parent, sibling, step-child, spouse, partner, tutor or curator, preceptor or employer or if he assumed, by law or other form, an obligation to care, protect or watch over the victim; or IV ? there is use of violence, grave threat or fraud. § 3 If the crime is committed with the purpose of gaining economic advantage, a fine is also applied" (BRASIL, 1940).2See, for example, Comaroff and Comaroff (1991) and Hartman (1997).3"That is, not archives, but active file and other documents that are currently in use" (Hull, 2012b, p. 28).4The expression "graphic artifact" was coined by Hull (2012b) in order to designate the diverse documents and types of records produced in bureaucratic offices, such as maps, copies, cards, signatures and lists, indissociably drawing attention both to their material dimension and their role as crucial mediators in producing the persons to which they refer.5As a title given to police reports, "missing person" is not to be confused with the international criminal type "enforced disappearance", known, in the common sense language, as "political disappearance". "Missing person", as discussed later in this article, is an administrative category attached in Brazilian police precincts to what has been called, in some occasions, "civil disappearance" (cf. Oliveira). "Enforced disappearance" is a crime against humanity, defined by the International Criminal Court in 1998 and regulated by the so-called Rome Statute. "Enforced disappearance" means "the arrest, detention or abduction of persons by a state or political organization, or with the authorization, support or acquiescence of a state or political organization, followed by a refusal to acknowledge the deprivation of freedom or to give information about these persons' fate or whereabouts, with the intention of keeping them outside the reach of legal protection for a prolonged period." ( Jardim 2011:14). For an anthropological analysis of the current incidence of "enforced disappearances" in Brazil, which also explores the possibility that this crime remains concealed by the administrative category "missing person", see Araújo (2008, 2012).6This formalization of investigations on paper is what guarantees that the prosecutor, judge and the target of the investigation are able to follow the legality of actions carried out in police headquarters (Vidal, 2013, p. 36).7The expression is used in article 9 of the Criminal Process Code (Brazil, 1941): "all pieces of police inquiry shall be, in a single process, reduced to writing or typed and, in this case, signed by the authority".8"Qualification" is the formal manner of identifying individuals in legal acts and documents, with at least some of the following information: full name, sex, date of birth, nationality, place of birth, marital status, parents' names, educational level, occupation, number of documents, phone number and address.9The formal procedure through which the interview is "translated" and registered in a "term of statement".
10The research included 11 of the 14 "human trafficking for sexual exploitation" inquiries ongoing in the Rio de Janeiro Federal Police precinct chosen for the study. At the time, that precinct had the largest number of "human trafficking" cases of all Federal Police regional offices, which are situated in each Brazilian state. Only one inquiry (the one analyzed) led to an indictment. In addition to this inquiry, the veracity and authorship of the crime were established in only one other case that had been investigated by the Civil Police and whose criminals had already been prosecuted and convicted for state crimes, such as "sexual exploitation of children and adolescents" and "pimping". Since this investigation also gathered evidence of "international human trafficking", a copy of the inquiry was sent to the Federal Court and the Federal Police.11The "indictment" is the act of formalizing suspicion within the legal inquiry, usually at the end of investigations. For a more detailed explanation, see Vidal (2013).12Quoting Eilbaum (2012), "the VPI initials comes from article 5, paragraph 3 of the Brazilian Criminal Process Code. It refers to the fact that, when a criminal infraction is reported to the police, it must, after verifying the information, initiate a police inquiry. Based on the act of verifying information, the police created a bureaucratic administrative piece of their own, called VPI." (2012, p.414)13Reference to a traditional Brazilian dish made from beans and pork. (Translator's note)14The consolidated interpretation of these hierarchizations, developed in reference anthropological studies on public security (cf. Kant de Lima, 1995; Kant de Lima, Pires and Eilbam, 2008; Miranda et al, 2010) is that police authority is constituted, in day-to-day routine, through the ways in which agents not only hierarchize but also criminalize (or not) events with which they deal. As Kant de Lima, Pires and Eilbaum (2008) put it, in police precincts "cases of theft for which there is no evidence, threats, domestic disputes, among others, are filtered, set aside, avoided. That is because "real" cases, cases that "resonate", that are relevant, are homicides, kidnappings, cargo robberies, drug trafficking, among others." (p. 166)15As Ferreira details in the dissertation (2011) that resulted from the research, the SDP is responsible for investigating "missing persons" cases registered in a specific set of regular precincts (from the 1st to the 44th police precincts) of the Rio de Janeiro State capital. The precincts which first register these cases have fifteen days to carry out an investigation and close them. After that deadline, if the investigations have not solved the case, the SDP then takes responsibility for all "missing persons" cases registered in those precincts (Rio de Janeiro, 1991).16If, on the one hand, the status assigned to VPIs is not only distinct, but also inferior to that of police inquiries, Kant de Lima's (1995, p.68-69) ethnography reveals that these administrative procedures offer a greater margin of autonomy to police officers than inquiries, since they do not require an authorization by a judge or prosecutor, but only a commissioner's decision, in order to be archived.17The pioneer work by Oliveira (2007) also dealt with police officers' questions and reflections in terms of their attributions and responsibilities when faced with "missing persons" cases.18In December 2009, the ISP, a state agency dedicated to research and to training public servants in the public security field, divulged a pioneer study on "missing persons" cases. Titled "Research on the Missing", the study, which has been periodically updated since its release, sought to map out cases in the state in order to identify, on the one hand, the profile of "missing persons" and, on the other, the circumstances and possible causes of their disappearance. Among the results, there is one information frequently evoked at the SDP: both in the original study's sample and in its follow-ups, over 70% of cases ended with the "missing persons" returning to their homes or at least with their whereabouts being identified.19In the dissertation that resulted from the research (Ferreira, 2011, p.94-112), there is a detailed reflection on this enigmatic character and its relationship with the documents' material elements. For reasons of economy, the issue will not be explored here.Publication Dates
» Publication in this collection28 Jan 2015
» Date of issueDec 2014

History» Accepted20 Sept 2013
» Received12 Aug 2014

?	Associação Brasileira de Antropologia (ABA)Caixa Postal 04491, 70904-970 Brasília - DF / Brasil, Tel./ Fax 55 61 3307-3754 - Brasília - DF - BrazilE-mail: vibrant.aba@gmail.com
? Stay informed of issues for this journal through your RSS reader
					
Home  Housing , local and community  Land registration  Land registration searches, fees and formsSearch for land and property information
Find information about a property in England or Wales, even if you do not ownit.You’ll need to search di?erent registers if the property is in Scotland or the property is in Northern Ireland.This service is also available in Welsh (Cymraeg).What you can getYou can download copies of the property summary, title plan and title register for a property in the service.Get a property summaryThe property summary includes:the property’s address - the address held by Royal Mail the property descriptionthe ‘tenure type’ - the type of ownership the property haswhether there are any ‘restrictive covenants’ - promises to not do certain things with the land, like not building on a particular areawhether there are any ‘easements’ - the rights of one piece of land over another, like a right of wayTo get details of any ‘restrictive covenants’ or ‘easements’ you’ll need to buy the title register.Get a title registerThe title register usually includes:the title numberwho owns the propertyhow much the property was last sold for whether the property has a mortgagedetails of any ‘restrictive covenants’ - promises to not do certain things with the land, like not building on a particular areadetails of any ‘easements’ - the rights of one piece of land over another, like a right of wayIn some cases, the title register will not include the details of the restrictive covenants or easements, but will say which documents do.Get a title planThe title plan includes the property’s location and general boundaries.Search for a propertyYou’ll need to order an o?cial copy of the register if you need to prove property ownership, for example for a court case.Before you startYou’ll need an email address and a debit or credit card to use this service.Read g uidance on getting information about property and land, including alternative sources of information.Fees             How much it costs Property summary FreeTitle register	£7Title plan	£7If you want to buy documents, you’ll need to create an account.O?cial copies cannot be downloaded online - you’ll need to get them sent to you by post. It costs £11 per document.Get helpContact HM Land Registry if you need:help accessing y our accounthelp using the service, like downloading informationhelp with something else, for example with your property’s boundaries or changing the name on your property recordYou can g et a flood risk report for properties in Eng land from the Environment Agency.
Related contentRegistering land or property with HM Land RegistryYour property boundariesProtect your land and property from fraud Contact HM Land RegistrySearch for local land charges on land and propertyCollectionLand registration: Searches, fees and formsUsing land for homebuilding and regeneration
Explore the topicPlanning permission and building regulationsServices and informationGovernment activityBenefitsEducation and learningDepartmentsBirths, death, marriages and careEmploying peopleNewsBusiness and self-employedEnvironment and countrysideGuidance and regulationChildcare and parentingHousing and local servicesResearch and statisticsCitizenship and living in the UKMoney and taxPolicy papers and consultationsCrime, justice and the lawPassports, travel and living abroadTransparencyDisabled peopleVisas and immigrationHow government worksDriving and transportWorking , jobs and pensionsGet involved
Home  Environment   Climate chang e and energyGuidanceSelling wood for domestic use in EnglandWhat you need to do to supply, distribute and sell wood for use in domestic heating appliances in England.From: Department for Environment, Food & Rural A?airsPublished 16 February 2021Last updated 7 July 2022 — See all updatesRelated contentSelling manufactured solid fuels for domestic use in Eng landDomestic solid fuels: rules for local authorities in Eng landSelling coal for domestic use in Eng landSelling wood in volumes of 2 cubic metres or more in Eng land: customer noticeGetting fuel authorised for sale in smoke control areasSmoke control areas: the rules
Small volumes of woodYou can only supply or sell wood fuel in volumes of less than 2 cubic metres if it is certified as ‘Ready to Burn’. This confirms it has a moisture content of 20% or less.The Ready to Burn certification scheme applies to: firewood in single retail bags firewood supplied as a bulk delivery in loose volumes of less than 2 cubic metres wood briquettes in single retail bags wood briquettes supplied as a bulk delivery in loose volumes of less than 2 cubic metresSuppliers: getting wood fuel certifiedSuppliers must submit an application to get wood fuel certified. You’ll need to: complete an application form provide a representative fuel sample provide evidence on how the moisture content of the wood is controlled.  give the numbers and locations of your depots give the names of retail outlets and websites where your fuel is sold provide annual sales figures for the previous year to establish appropriate scheme fees agree to the conditions for certification and to comply with the rulesAfter you apply, you’ll be told how long it will take to get your wood certified. You’ll have to pay application, registration and any additional testing fees.If your wood meets the legal standards and you’ve paid the fees, it will be certified and you’ll be: added to the Ready to Burn certified wood fuels list given a certificate with a unique ID for each fuel certified  sent a copy of the authorised Ready to Burn logoRenewing your certificationEach certification period lasts for 12 months from the date it was approved.You must pay an annual certification fee plus annual testing fee before your renewal date.Sellers: storing and labellingWood certified as Ready to Burn has a guaranteed moisture content of 20% or less.Make sure you store the wood properly, so that you do not sell it to customers damaged or wet. You can do this by storing the wood indoors, o? the ground or undercover.Rotate stock so that older stock is used up first.The wood must be correctly labelled when it is sold to third-party sellers and final customers. You must make sure the following details are either attached to the wood packaging, displayed alongside it on the shelf or next to the price: approved ‘Ready to Burn’ logo  supplier’s company name unique certification numberYou can check the supplier’s details and certification number on the Woodsure website.If you sell online, make sure the logo for each fuel is displayed on the section of the webpage where the fuel is advertised.Crates or trailer loads of woodYou do not need to get wood fuel sales of 2 cubic metres or more certified. You can include a note when you deliver the wood to explain it is dry.Suppliers who sell wood in volumes of 2 cubic metres or more must provide customers with this notice that explains how to dry , store and check the moisture of the wood before it is used. This also applies to small-scale wood producers.Sellers: rules in smoke control areasYou must inform customers that they can only use wood in an exempt appliance in a smoke control area.For example, you could put a sign next to the fuels or tills, or post a message on your website for customers paying online.Compliance checksLocal authorities are responsible for enforcing the rules. An enforcement o?cer may check: small bags of wood are sold with the Ready to Burn logo, certification number and supplier or manufacturer details displayed correctly certification details against the certification list correct information on drying is provided to customers for wood fuel volumes of 2 cubic metres or more sales records (including sales to third-party retailers) how you’re storing wood (so that you aren’t selling it to customers damaged or wet) delivery records to households within smoke control areas you’re informing customers that they can only use wood in an appropriate exempt appliance in a smoke control areaFinesYou could be fined if: you’ve stored wood so it has a moisture content of more than 20% the wood does not have the ‘Ready to Burn’ logo or is not labelled correctly You could get a: £300 fixed penalty fine issued by your local authority fine of more than £300 depending on the severity of the o?ence issued by the courtsPublished 16 February 2021Last updated 7 July 2022 + show all updates
Detailed guidanceSelling coal for domestic use in Eng landGetting fuel authorised for sale in smoke control areasSelling manufactured solid fuels for domestic use in Eng landDomestic solid fuels: rules for local authorities in Eng land
 Explore the topicClimate chang e and energy Pollution and environmental qualityServices and informationGovernment activityBenefitsEducation and learningDepartmentsBirths, death, marriages and careEmploying peopleNewsBusiness and self-employedEnvironment and countrysideGuidance and regulationChildcare and parentingHousing and local servicesResearch and statisticsCitizenship and living in the UKMoney and taxPolicy papers and consultationsCrime, justice and the lawPassports, travel and living abroadTransparencyDisabled peopleVisas and immigrationHow government worksDriving and transportWorking , jobs and pensionsGet involved
Home  Crime, justice and the law  Your rig hts and legal supportSelling, buying and carrying knives and weapons
The maximum penalty for an adult carrying a knife or weapon illegally is either 4 years in prison, an unlimited fine or both. You’ll get a prison sentence if you’re convicted of carrying a knife or weapon illegally more than once.
Related contentPolice powers to stop and search: your rights
Basic laws on knives and weaponsIt’s illegal to use any knife or weapon in a threatening way.There are di?erent rules for shotguns and firearms.It’s also illegal to: carry most knives or any weapons in public without a ‘good reason’  sell most knives or any weapons to anyone under the age of 18The exception to these 2 rules are folding pocketknives that: have a cutting edge no longer than 3 inches are not lock knives (they do not have a button, spring or catch that you have to use to fold the knife)In Scotland, you’re allowed to sell 16 and 17 year olds cutlery and kitchen knives.Good reasons for carrying a knife or weapon in publicIf the knife or weapon is not banned, some examples of ‘good reasons’ include using it: for your work for religious reasons, such as the kirpan some Sikhs carry  as part of any national costumeA court will decide if you’ve got a good reason to carry a knife or a weapon if you’re charged with carrying it illegally.If you want advice on what counts as a ‘good reason’, contact your local police or g et legal advice.Banned knives and weaponsIf a knife or weapon is listed in the following table, it’s illegal to:  possess it bring it into the UK  sell or hire it out lend or give it to someoneThere are some legal exemptions. For example, knives and weapons which are over 100 years old are exempt, except for flick knives. If you want advice on exemptions, contact y our local police or g et legal advice.
Knife or weapon type
Description
Baton	A straight, side-handled or friction-lock truncheon. Belt buckle knife  A buckle which incorporates or conceals a knife.
Blowpipe or blow gunButterfly knife or ‘balisong’Cyclone or spiral knife
A hollow tube out of which hard pellets or darts are shot by the use of breath.A blade enclosed by its handle. Designed to split down the middle to reveal the blade without using a spring or other mechanical means.A blade with a handle, a sharp point at the end and one or more cutting edges that each form a helix.
Disguised knife	A blade or sharp point hidden inside something that looks like a commonly carried everyday object. For example, a comb, brush, pen, cigarette lighter, key, lipstick or phone.
Flick knife, gravity knife, ‘switchblade’ or ‘automatic knife’
A knife where the blade opens automatically or is released from the handle, either by gravity or by pressing a button or something else on the knife.
Footclaw	A bar of metal or other hard material worn strapped to the foot, from which a number of sharp spikes come out.Handclaw	A band of metal or other hard material worn on the hand, from which a number of sharp spikes come out.Hollow kubotan	A cylinder-shaped container containing a number of sharp spikes.Knuckleduster	A band of metal or other hard material that’s worn on one or more fingers and is designed to cause injury. This also includes any weapon that incorporates a knuckleduster.
Kusari or ‘manrikigusari’
A hard weight or hand grip fastened to each end of a piece of rope, cord, chain or wire.
Kusari gama	A sickle fastened to one end of a piece of rope, cord, chain or wire.Kyoketsu shoge	A hook-knife fastened to one end of a piece of rope, cord, chain or wire.Push dagger	A knife where the handle fits within a clenched fist and the blade comes out from between two fingers.
Shuriken, ‘shaken’, ‘death star’ or ‘throwing star’
A hard non-flexible plate with three or more sharp radiating points, designed to be thrown.
Stealth knife	A knife or spike made of a material that cannot be picked up by metal detectors and which is not made for use at home, for food or as a toy.Sword	A curved blade of 50 centimetres or over, based on the straight-line distance from the top of the handle to the tip of the blade.Swordstick	A hollow walking stick or cane containing a blade which may be used as a sword.
Telescopic truncheon
A truncheon that extends automatically by pressing a button, a spring or other device that’s in or attached to the handle.
Zombie knife	A knife with a cutting edge, a serrated edge and images or words suggesting it is used for violence.You should contact your local police to check if a knife or weapon is illegal.Explore the topicYour rights and legal supportServices and informationGovernment activityBenefitsEducation and learningDepartmentsBirths, death, marriages and careEmploying peopleNewsBusiness and self-employedEnvironment and countrysideGuidance and regulationChildcare and parentingHousing and local servicesResearch and statisticsCitizenship and living in the UKMoney and taxPolicy papers and consultationsCrime, justice and the lawPassports, travel and living abroadTransparencyDisabled peopleVisas and immigrationHow government worksDriving and transportWorking , jobs and pensionsGet involved
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesPolice, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 20222022 CHAPTER 32An Act to make provision about the police and other emergency workers; to make provision about collaboration between authorities to prevent and reduce serious violence; to make provision about offensive weapons homicide reviews; to make provision for new offences and for the modification of existing offences; to make provision about the powers of the police and other authorities for the purposes of preventing, detecting, investigating or prosecuting crime or investigating other matters; to make provision about the maintenance of public order; to make provision about the removal, storage and disposal of vehicles; to make provision in connection with driving offences; to make provision about cautions; to make provision about bail and remand; to make provision about sentencing, detention, release, management and rehabilitation of offenders; to make provision about secure 16 to 19 Academies; to make provision for and in connection with procedures before courts and tribunals; and for connected purposes.	[28th April 2022]BE IT ENACTED by the Queen’s most Excellent Majesty, by and with the advice and consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons, in this present Parliament assembled, and by the authority of the same, as follows:—
2	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 1 – Protection of the police etcDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesPART 1PROTECTION OF THE POLICE ETCPolice covenant report1 Police covenant report(1) The Secretary of State must in each financial year—(a) prepare a police covenant report, and(b) lay a copy of the report before Parliament.(2) A police covenant report is a report about—(a) the health and well-being of members and former members of the police workforce,(b) the physical protection of such persons,(c) the support required by members of their families, and(d) any other matter in relation to members or former members of the police workforce, or a particular description of such persons, that the Secretary of State considers appropriate,so far as these matters relate to the fact that the persons concerned are members or former members of the police workforce.(3) In preparing a police covenant report the Secretary of State must have regard in particular to—(a) the obligations of and sacrifices made by members of the police workforce, and(b) the principle that it is desirable to remove any disadvantage for members or former members of the police workforce arising from their membership or former membership.(4) In preparing a police covenant report the Secretary of State must ensure that the views of—(a) any relevant government department, and  (b) anyone else the Secretary of State considers appropriate, are sought in relation to the matters to be covered by the report.(5) A police covenant report must set out in full or summarise any views obtained under subsection (4).(6) The Secretary of State may not include in a police covenant report a summary under subsection (5) unless the person whose views are summarised has approved the summary.(7) A police covenant report must state whether, in the Secretary of State’s opinion, in respect of any matter covered by the report, members or former members of the police workforce, or a particular description of such persons, are at a disadvantage when compared with other persons or such descriptions of other persons as the Secretary of State considers appropriate.(1) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)	3PART 1 – Protection of the police etcDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(8) Where the Secretary of State’s opinion is that there is any such disadvantage as mentioned in subsection (7), the report must set out the Secretary of State’s response to that.(9) In this section—“financial year” means—(a) the period which begins with the day on which this section comes into force and ends with the following 31 March, and(b) each successive period of 12 months; “members of the police workforce” means—(a) members of police forces in England and Wales,(b) special constables appointed under section 27 of the Police Act 1996,(c) staff appointed by the chief officer of police of a police force in England and Wales,(d) persons designated as community support volunteers or policing support volunteers under section 38 of the Police Reform Act 2002,(e) staff appointed by a local policing body if, or to the extent that, they are employed to assist a police force in England and Wales,(f) persons providing services, in pursuance of contractual arrangements (but without being employed by the chief officer of a police force in England and Wales or a local policing body), to assist a police force in England and Wales in relation to the discharge of its chief officer’s functions,(g) constables of the British Transport Police Force,(h) special constables of the British Transport Police Force appointed under section 25 of the Railways and Transport Safety Act 2003,(i) employees of the British Transport Police Authority appointed under section 27 of that Act and under the direction and control of the chief constable of the British Transport Police Force,(j) persons designated as community support volunteers or policing support volunteers under section 38 of the Police Reform Act 2002 as applied by section 28 of the Railways and Transport Safety Act 2003,(k) members of the Civil Nuclear Constabulary,(l) employees of the Civil Nuclear Police Authority employed under paragraph 6 of Schedule 10 to the Energy Act 2004 if, or to the extent that, they are employed to assist the Civil Nuclear Constabulary,(m) members of the Ministry of Defence Police and other persons under the direction and control of the Chief Constable of the Ministry of Defence Police, and(n) National Crime Agency officers;  “former members of the police workforce” means persons who have ceased to be members of the police workforce;  “relevant government department”, in relation to a matter to be covered by a police covenant report, means a department of the Government of the United Kingdom (apart from the Home Office) which the Secretary of State considers has functions relevant to that matter.(10) The reference in subsection (2) to members of the families of members and former members of the police workforce is a reference to such descriptions of persons(1) 
4	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 1 – Protection of the police etcDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesconnected with members or former members of the police workforce as the Secretary of State considers should be covered by a police covenant report.Offences against emergency workers2 Increase in penalty for assault on emergency worker(1) In section 1 of the Assaults on Emergency Workers (Offences) Act 2018 (offence of common assault, or battery, committed against emergency worker), in subsection (2)(b) (penalty for conviction on indictment), for “12 months” substitute “2 years”.(2) Subsection (1) applies only in relation to offences committed on or after the day on which this section comes into force.3 Required life sentence for manslaughter of emergency worker(1) The Sentencing Code is amended in accordance with subsections (2) to (15).(2) In section 177 (youth rehabilitation orders), in subsection (3)(b)(i), after “258” insert “or 258A”.(3) In section 221 (overview of Part 10), in subsection (2)(b), for “section 258” substitute “sections 258 and 258A”.(4) In section 249 (sentence of detention under section 250), in subsection (2)(a), for “section 258” substitute “sections 258 and 258A”.(5) In section 255 (extended sentence of detention), in subsection (1)(d), after “258(2)” insert “or 258A(2)”.(6) After section 258 insert—“258A Required sentence of detention for life for manslaughter of emergency worker(1) This section applies where—(a) a person aged under 18 is convicted of a relevant offence,(a) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)	5PART 1 – Protection of the police etcDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(2) The court must impose a sentence of detention for life under section 250 unless the court is of the opinion that there are exceptional circumstances which—(a) relate to the offence or the offender, and(b) justify not doing so.(3) For the purposes of subsection (1)(c) the circumstances in which an offence is to be taken as committed against a person acting in the exercise of functions as an emergency worker include circumstances where the offence takes place at a time when the person is not at work but is carrying out functions which, if done in work time, would have been in the exercise of functions as an emergency worker.(4) In this section “relevant offence” means the offence of manslaughter, but does not include—(a) manslaughter by gross negligence, or(b) manslaughter mentioned in section 2(3) or 4(1) of the Homicide Act 1957 or section 54(7) of the Coroners and Justice Act 2009 (partial defences to murder).(5) In this section—“emergency worker” has the meaning given by section 68; “relevant commencement date” means the date on which section 3of the Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (required lifesentence for manslaughter of emergency worker) comes into force.(6) An offence the sentence for which is imposed under this section is not to be regarded as an offence the sentence for which is fixed by law.(7) Where an offence is found to have been committed over a period of 2 or more days, or at some time during a period of 2 or more days, it must be taken for the purposes of subsection (1)(b) to have been committed on the last of those days.”(7) In section 267 (extended sentence of detention in a young offender institution), in subsection (1)(d), for “or 274” substitute “, 274 or 274A”.(8) In section 272 (offences other than murder), in subsection (2)(b), for “or 274” substitute “, 274 or 274A”.(9) After section 274 insert—“274A Required sentence of custody for life for manslaughter of emergency worker(1) This section applies where—(a) a person aged 18 or over but under 21 is convicted of a relevant offence,(a) 
6	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 1 – Protection of the police etcDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(2) The court must impose a sentence of custody for life under section 272 unless the court is of the opinion that there are exceptional circumstances which—(a) relate to the offence or the offender, and(b) justify not doing so.(3) For the purposes of subsection (1)(c) the circumstances in which an offence is to be taken as committed against a person acting in the exercise of functions as an emergency worker include circumstances where the offence takes place at a time when the person is not at work but is carrying out functions which, if done in work time, would have been in the exercise of functions as an emergency worker.(4) In this section “relevant offence” means the offence of manslaughter, but does not include—(a) manslaughter by gross negligence, or(b) manslaughter mentioned in section 2(3) or 4(1) of the Homicide Act 1957 or section 54(7) of the Coroners and Justice Act 2009 (partial defences to murder).(5) In this section—“emergency worker” has the meaning given by section 68; “relevant commencement date” means the date on which section 3of the Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (required lifesentence for manslaughter of emergency worker) comes into force.(6) An offence the sentence for which is imposed under this section is not to be regarded as an offence the sentence for which is fixed by law.(7) Where an offence is found to have been committed over a period of 2 or more days, or at some time during a period of 2 or more days, it must be taken for the purposes of subsection (1)(b) to have been committed on the last of those days.”(10) In section 280 (extended sentence of imprisonment), in subsection (1)(d), for “or 285” substitute “, 285 or 285A”.(11) After section 285 insert—“285A Required life sentence for manslaughter of emergency worker(1) This section applies where—(a) a person aged 21 or over is convicted of a relevant offence,(b) the offence was committed—(i) when the person was aged 16 or over, and(ii) on or after the relevant commencement date, and(c) the offence was committed against an emergency worker acting in the exercise of functions as such a worker.(2) The court must impose a sentence of imprisonment for life unless the court is of the opinion that there are exceptional circumstances which—(a) relate to the offence or the offender, and(b) justify not doing so.(a) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)	7PART 1 – Protection of the police etcDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(3) For the purposes of subsection (1)(c) the circumstances in which an offence is to be taken as committed against a person acting in the exercise of functions as an emergency worker include circumstances where the offence takes place at a time when the person is not at work but is carrying out functions which, if done in work time, would have been in the exercise of functions as an emergency worker.(4) In this section “relevant offence” means the offence of manslaughter, but does not include—(a) manslaughter by gross negligence, or(b) manslaughter mentioned in section 2(3) or 4(1) of the Homicide Act 1957 or section 54(7) of the Coroners and Justice Act 2009 (partial defences to murder).(5) In this section—“emergency worker” has the meaning given by section 68; “relevant commencement date” means the date on which section 3of the Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (required lifesentence for manslaughter of emergency worker) comes into force.(6) An offence the sentence for which is imposed under this section is not to be regarded as an offence the sentence for which is fixed by law.(7) Where an offence is found to have been committed over a period of 2 or more days, or at some time during a period of 2 or more days, it must be taken for the purposes of subsection (1)(b) to have been committed on the last of those days.”(12) In section 329 (conversion of sentence of detention to sentence of imprisonment), in subsection (7)(a), after “258” insert “or 258A”.(13) In section 399 (mandatory sentences), in paragraph (b)(i)—(a) for “258, 274 or 285” substitute “258, 258A, 274, 274A, 285 or 285A”;(b) omit “dangerous”.(14) In section 417 (commencement of Schedule 22), in subsection (3)(d), for “and 274” substitute “, 274 and 274A”.(15) In Schedule 22 (amendments of the Sentencing Code etc)—(a) after paragraph 59 insert—“59A In section 285A (required life sentence for manslaughter of emergency worker), in subsection (1)(a), for “21” substitute “18”.”;(b) in paragraph 73(a)(ii), after “274” insert “, 274A”;(c) in paragraph 101(2), after “274,” insert “274A,”.(16) In section 37 of the Mental Health Act 1983 (powers of courts to order hospital admission or guardianship)—(a) in subsection (1A)—(i) after “258,” insert “258A,”;(ii) after “274,” insert “274A,”;(iii) for “or 285” substitute “, 285 or 285A”;(i) 
8 Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 1 – Protection of the police etcDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(b) in subsection (1B)—(i) in paragraph (a), after “258” insert “or 258A”;(ii) in paragraph (b), for “or 274” substitute “, 274 or 274A”;(iii) in paragraph (c), for “or 285” substitute “, 285 or 285A”.Special constables and Police Federations4 Special constables and Police Federations: amendments to the Police Act 1996(1) The Police Act 1996 is amended as follows.(2) In section 51 (regulations for special constables), in subsection (2), after paragraph (c) insert—“(ca) the treatment as occasions of police duty of attendance at meetings of the Police Federations and of any body recognised by the Secretary of State for the purposes of section 64;”.(3) Section 59 (Police Federations) is amended as set out in subsections (4) to (7).(4) For subsection (1) substitute—“(1) There shall continue to be a Police Federation for England and Wales for the purpose of representing members of the police forces in England and Wales, and special constables appointed for a police area in England and Wales, in all matters affecting their welfare and efficiency, except for—(a) questions of promotion affecting individuals, and(b) (subject to subsection (2)) questions of discipline affecting individuals.”(5) After subsection (1A) insert—“(1B) There shall continue to be a Police Federation for Scotland for the purpose of representing constables of the Police Service of Scotland in all matters affecting their welfare and efficiency, except for—(a) questions of promotion affecting individuals, and(b) (subject to subsection (2A)) questions of discipline affecting individuals.”(6) For subsection (2) substitute—“(2) The Police Federation for England and Wales may—(a) represent a member of a police force at any proceedings brought under regulations made in accordance with section 50(3) above, or on an appeal from any such proceedings;(b) represent a special constable at any proceedings brought under regulations made in accordance with section 51(2A) above, or on an appeal from any such proceedings.(a) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)	9PART 1 – Protection of the police etcDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(2A) The Police Federation for Scotland may represent a constable of the Police Service of Scotland at any proceedings brought under regulations made in accordance with section 48 of the Police and Fire Reform (Scotland) Act 2012 (asp 8) in so far as relating to the matters described in section 52 of that Act, or on an appeal from any such proceedings.”(7) For subsection (3) substitute—“(3) Except on an appeal to a police appeals tribunal or as provided in regulations made in accordance with section 84—(a) a member of a police force in England and Wales may only be represented under subsection (2)(a) by another member of a police force or a special constable;(b) a special constable appointed for a police area in England and Wales may only be represented under subsection (2)(b) by another special constable or a member of a police force;(c) a constable of the Police Service of Scotland may only be represented under subsection (2A) by another constable of the Police Service of Scotland.”(8) In section 60 (regulations for Police Federations), in subsection (2), in paragraph (e), for the words from the beginning to “requiring” substitute “about the pay, pension or allowances and other conditions of service for any member of a police force or special constable who is the secretary or officer of a Police Federation (including provision which applies existing regulations with modifications), and may require”.Police driving standards5 Meaning of dangerous driving: constables etc(1) Section 2A of the Road Traffic Act 1988 (meaning of dangerous driving) is amended in accordance with subsections (2) to (4).(2) In subsection (1), after paragraph (b) insert “But this subsection does not apply where subsection (1B) applies.”(3) After subsection (1) insert—“(1A) Subsection (1B) applies where a designated person—(a) is driving for police purposes (subject to subsections (1E) and (1F)), and(b) has undertaken prescribed training.(1B) For the purposes of sections 1, 1A and 2 above, the designated person is to be regarded as driving dangerously if (and, subject to subsection (2) below, only if)—
10	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 1 – Protection of the police etcDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(a) the way the person drives falls far below what would be expected of a competent and careful constable who has undertaken the same prescribed training, and(b) it would be obvious to such a competent and careful constable that driving in that way would be dangerous.(1C) In subsections (1A) and (1B) “designated person” means—(a) a constable,(b) a member of staff appointed by the chief officer of police of a police force in England and Wales,(c) a member of staff appointed by a local policing body and employed to assist a police force in England and Wales,(d) a member of staff appointed by the Scottish Police Authority under section 26(1) of the Police and Fire Reform (Scotland) Act 2012 (asp 8),(e) an employee of the British Transport Police Authority appointed under section 27 of the Railways and Transport Safety Act 2003,(f) a person employed or engaged by—(i) a chief officer of police,(ii) the British Transport Police Authority,(iii) the Civil Nuclear Police Authority,(iv) the chief constable for the Ministry of Defence Police, or(v) the Scottish Police Authority,to train a person within any of paragraphs (a) to (e) to drive for police purposes,(g) a person employed or engaged by a person within paragraph (f)(i) to(v) to train another person to carry out training of the kind mentioned in that paragraph,(h) a National Crime Agency officer, or(i) a person engaged by the National Crime Agency—(i) to train a National Crime Agency officer to drive for law enforcement purposes, or(ii) to train another person to carry out training of the kind mentioned in sub-paragraph (i).(1D) In subsection (1C)(a) “constable” does not include a port constable within the meaning of section 7 of the Marine Navigation Act 2013 or a person appointed to act as a constable under provision made by virtue of section 16 of the Harbours Act 1964.(1E) In the case of a National Crime Agency officer, the reference in subsection (1A)(a) to driving for police purposes is to be read as a reference to driving for law enforcement purposes.(1F) In the case of a person within paragraph (i) of subsection (1C), the reference in subsection (1A)(a) to driving for police purposes is to be read as a reference to driving for the purpose of the training mentioned in that paragraph.”(4) In subsection (3)—(a) after “(1)” insert “, (1B)”, and(b) after “driver” insert “or constable (as the case may be)”.(a) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)	11PART 1 – Protection of the police etcDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have beenmade appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(5) The amendments made by this section have effect only in relation to driving occurring after this section comes into force.6 Meaning of careless driving: constables etc(1) Section 3ZA of the Road Traffic Act 1988 (meaning of careless driving) is amended in accordance with subsections (2) to (4).(2) In subsection (2), after “driver.” insert “But this subsection does not apply where subsection (2B) applies.”(3) After subsection (2) insert—“(2A) Subsection (2B) applies where a designated person—(a) is driving for police purposes (subject to subsections (2E) and (2F)), and(b) has undertaken prescribed training.(2B) The designated person is to be regarded as driving without due care and attention if (and only if) the way the person drives falls below what would be expected of a competent and careful constable who has undertaken the same prescribed training.(2C) In subsections (2A) and (2B) “designated person” means—(a) a constable,(b) a member of staff appointed by the chief officer of police of a police force in England and Wales,(c) a member of staff appointed by a local policing body and employed to assist a police force in England and Wales,(d) a member of staff appointed by the Scottish Police Authority under section 26(1) of the Police and Fire Reform (Scotland) Act 2012 (asp 8),(e) an employee of the British Transport Police Authority appointed under section 27 of the Railways and Transport Safety Act 2003,(f) a person employed or engaged by—(i) a chief officer of police,(ii) the British Transport Police Authority,(iii) the Civil Nuclear Police Authority,(iv) the chief constable for the Ministry of Defence Police, or(v) the Scottish Police Authority,to train a person within any of paragraphs (a) to (e) to drive for police purposes,(g) a person employed or engaged by a person within paragraph (f)(i) to(v) to train another person to carry out training of the kind mentioned in that paragraph,
12	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 1 – Protection of the police etcDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(h) a National Crime Agency officer, or(i) a person engaged by the National Crime Agency—(i) to train a National Crime Agency officer to drive for law enforcement purposes, or(ii) to train another person to carry out training of the kind mentioned in sub-paragraph (i).(2D) In subsection (2C)(a) “constable” does not include a port constable within the meaning of section 7 of the Marine Navigation Act 2013 or a person appointed to act as a constable under provision made by virtue of section 16 of the Harbours Act 1964.(2E) In the case of a National Crime Agency officer, the reference in subsection (2A)(a) to driving for police purposes is to be read as a reference to driving for law enforcement purposes.(2F) In the case of a person within paragraph (i) of subsection (2C), the reference in subsection (2A)(a) to driving for police purposes is to be read as a reference to driving for the purpose of the training mentioned in that paragraph.”(4) In subsection (3)—(a) after “(2)” insert “or (2B)”, and(b) after “driver” insert “or constable (as the case may be)”.(5) The amendments made by this section have effect only in relation to driving occurring after this section comes into force.7 Regulations relating to sections 5 and 6In section 195 of the Road Traffic Act 1988 (provisions as to regulations), after subsection (6) insert—“(7) Regulations prescribing training for the purposes of section 2A(1A)(b) or 3ZA(2A)(b) may make different provision for different persons or areas.”
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)	13PART 2 – Prevention, investigation and prosecution of crimeCHAPTER 1 – Functions relating to serious violence Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have beenmade appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesPART 2PREVENTION, INVESTIGATION AND PROSECUTION OF CRIMECHAPTER 1FUNCTIONS RELATING TO SERIOUS VIOLENCEFunctions relating to serious violence8 Duties to collaborate and plan to prevent and reduce serious violence(1) The specified authorities for a local government area must collaborate with each other to prevent and reduce serious violence in the area.(2) The duty imposed on the specified authorities for a local government area by subsection (1) includes a duty to plan together to exercise their functions so as to prevent and reduce serious violence in the area.(3) In particular, the specified authorities for a local government area must—(a) identify the kinds of serious violence that occur in the area,(b) identify the causes of serious violence in the area, so far as it is possible to do so, and(c) prepare and implement a strategy for exercising their functions to prevent and reduce serious violence in the area.(4) In preparing a strategy under this section for a local government area, the specified authorities for the area must ensure that the following are consulted—(a) each educational authority for the area;(b) each prison authority for the area;(c) each youth custody authority for the area.(5) A strategy under this section for a local government area may specify an action to be carried out by—(a) an educational authority for the area,(b) a prison authority for the area, or(c) a youth custody authority for the area.See section 15 for further provision about the duties of such authorities in relation to such actions.(6) In preparing a strategy under this section for a local government area, the specified authorities for the area may invite participation from—(a) in the case of a strategy for a local government area in England, a person of a description for the time being prescribed by order of the Secretary of State under section 5(3) of the Crime and Disorder Act 1998;(b) in the case of a strategy for a local government area in Wales, a person of a description for the time being prescribed by order of the Welsh Ministers under section 5(3) of that Act.(7) Once a strategy has been prepared under this section for a local government area, the specified authorities for the area must—(1) 
14	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 2 – Prevention, investigation and prosecution of crimeCHAPTER 1 – Functions relating to serious violenceDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(a) publish the strategy,(b) keep the strategy under review, and(c) from time to time prepare and implement a revised strategy.(8) A strategy under this section must not include any material that the specified authorities consider—(a) might jeopardise the safety of any person,(b) might prejudice the prevention or detection of crime or the investigation or prosecution of an offence, or(c) might compromise the security of, or good order or discipline within, an institution of a kind mentioned in the first column of a table in Schedule 2.(9) A strategy under this section may cover an area that is wider than a local government area if it is also prepared in the exercise of the powers in section 9.(10) The Secretary of State may by regulations make further provision for or in connection with the publication and dissemination of a strategy under this section.(11) References in subsections (4) to (10) to a strategy under this section include a revised strategy.(12) This section does not affect any power of a specified authority to collaborate or plan apart from this section.(13) For provisions about the interpretation of this section, see—(a) section 11 and Schedule 1 (specified authorities and local government areas);(b) section 12 and Schedule 2 (educational, prison and youth custody authorities);(c) section 13 (preventing and reducing serious violence).9 Powers to collaborate and plan to prevent and reduce serious violence(1) Two or more specified authorities may collaborate with each other to prevent and reduce serious violence in a relevant area.(2) The power conferred on specified authorities by subsection (1) includes a power to plan together to exercise their functions so as to prevent and reduce serious violence in a relevant area.(3) In particular, the specified authorities may—(a) identify the kinds of serious violence that occur in a relevant area,(b) identify the causes of serious violence in the area, and(c) prepare and implement a strategy for exercising their functions to prevent and reduce serious violence in the area.(4) In preparing a strategy under this section for a relevant area, the specified authorities preparing the strategy must ensure that the following are consulted—(a) every other specified authority for the area;(a) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)	15PART 2 – Prevention, investigation and prosecution of crimeCHAPTER 1 – Functions relating to serious violence Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have beenmade appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(b) each educational authority for the area;(c) each prison authority for the area;(d) each youth custody authority for the area.(5) A strategy under this section for a relevant area may specify actions to be carried out by—(a) an educational authority for the area,(b) a prison authority for the area, or(c) a youth custody authority for the area.See section 15 for further provision about the duties of such authorities in relation to such actions.(6) In preparing a strategy under this section for a relevant area, the specified authorities for the area may invite participation from—(a) in the case of a strategy for a relevant area in England, an eligible person for the time being prescribed by order of the Secretary of State under section 5(3) of the Crime and Disorder Act 1998;(b) in the case of a strategy for a relevant area in Wales, an eligible person for the time being prescribed by order of the Welsh Ministers under section 5(3) of that Act;(c) in the case of a strategy for a relevant area partly in England and partly in Wales, an eligible person for the time being prescribed by order of the Secretary of State or the Welsh Ministers under section 5(3) of that Act.(7) For the purposes of subsection (6), an eligible person is—(a) where a person is prescribed in terms of a description which includes a connection to a local government area, a person of that description with such a connection to a local government area all or part of which coincides with or falls within the relevant area, or(b) a person prescribed in terms that do not refer to a connection with a local government area.In this subsection “local government area” has the same meaning as in section 5 of the Crime and Disorder Act 1998 (see subsection (4) of that section).(8) Once a strategy has been prepared under this section for a relevant area, the specified authorities for the area—(a) must publish the strategy,(b) may keep the strategy under review, and(c) may from time to time prepare and implement a revised strategy.(9) A strategy under this section must not include any material that the specified authorities consider—(a) might jeopardise the safety of any person,(b) might prejudice the prevention or detection of crime or the investigation or prosecution of an offence, or(c) might compromise the security of, or good order or discipline within, an institution of a kind mentioned in the first column of a table in Schedule 2.(10) The Secretary of State may by regulations make further provision for or in connection with the publication and dissemination of a strategy under this section.(1) 
16	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 2 – Prevention, investigation and prosecution of crimeCHAPTER 1 – Functions relating to serious violenceDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(11) References in subsections (4) to (10) to a strategy under this section include a revised strategy.(12) This section does not affect any power of a specified authority to collaborate or plan apart from this section.(13) In this Chapter “relevant area”, in relation to a specified authority, educational authority, prison authority or youth custody authority means an area made up of—(a) all or part of a local government area for which it is a specified authority, educational authority, prison authority or youth custody authority, and(b) all or part of one or more other local government areas (regardless of whether, in the case of a specified authority or educational authority, it is also a specified authority or educational authority for the other area or areas).(14) For further provisions about the interpretation of this section, see—(a) section 11 and Schedule 1 (specified authorities and local government areas);(b) section 12 and Schedule 2 (educational, prison and youth custody authorities);(c) section 13 (preventing and reducing serious violence).10 Power to authorise collaboration etc. with other persons(1) The Secretary of State may by regulations—(a) confer powers on a specified authority to collaborate with a prescribed person to prevent and reduce serious violence in a prescribed area;(b) confer powers on a prescribed person to collaborate with a specified authority to prevent and reduce serious violence in a prescribed area.(2) The Secretary of State may by regulations authorise the disclosure of information—(a) by a prescribed person to any person listed in subsection (3) for the purposes of preventing and reducing serious violence in a prescribed area;(b) by any person listed in subsection (3) to a prescribed person for such purposes.(3) Those persons are—(a) a specified authority;(b) a local policing body;(c) an educational authority;(d) a prison authority;(e) a youth custody authority.(4) Regulations under subsection (2) may provide that a disclosure under the regulations does not breach—(a) any obligation of confidence owed by the person making the disclosure, or(b) any other restriction on the disclosure of information (however imposed).(5) But if regulations under subsection (2) contain provision under subsection (4)(b), they must provide that they do not authorise a disclosure of information that—(1) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)	17PART 2 – Prevention, investigation and prosecution of crimeCHAPTER 1 – Functions relating to serious violence Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have beenmade appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(a) would contravene the data protection legislation (but in determining whether a disclosure would do so, any power conferred by the regulations is to be taken into account), or(b) is prohibited by any of Parts 1 to 7 or Chapter 1 of Part 9 of the Investigatory Powers Act 2016.(6) Regulations under subsection (2) must not authorise—(a) the disclosure of patient information, or(b) the disclosure of personal information by a specified authority which is a health or social care authority.(7) This section does not affect any power to collaborate or to disclose information apart from regulations under this section.(8) In this section, “prescribed” means prescribed, or of a description prescribed, in regulations under this section.(9) Regulations under this section may, in particular, prescribe persons by reference to the fact that they have been invited under section 8(6) or 9(6) to participate in the preparation of a strategy under section 8 or 9.(10) In this Chapter—  “the data protection legislation” has the same meaning as in the Data Protection Act 2018 (see section 3 of that Act);  “health or social care authority” means a specified authority which is listed in the first column of the table headed “Health and social care” in Schedule 1; “patient information” means personal information (however recorded)which relates to—(a) the physical or mental health or condition of an individual,(b) the diagnosis of an individual’s condition, or(c) an individual’s care or treatment,or is (to any extent) derived directly or indirectly from information relating to any of those matters;  “personal information” means information which is in a form that identifies any individual or enables any individual to be identified (either by itself or in combination with other information).11 Specified authorities and local government areas(1) In this Chapter “specified authority” means a person listed in the first column of a table in Schedule 1.(2) Subsection (3) applies to a specified authority listed in Schedule 1 in terms that refer to the exercise of particular functions or to a particular capacity that it has.(3) References in this Chapter to the authority’s functions are to those functions or its functions when acting in that capacity.(1) 
18	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 2 – Prevention, investigation and prosecution of crimeCHAPTER 1 – Functions relating to serious violenceDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(4) In this Chapter “local government area” means—(a) in relation to England, a district, a London borough, the City of London or the Isles of Scilly;(b) in relation to Wales, a county or county borough.(5) For the purposes of this Chapter the Inner Temple and the Middle Temple form part of the City of London.(6) For the purposes of this Chapter a specified authority listed in a table in Schedule 1 is an authority for the local government area or (as the case may be) each local government area listed in the corresponding entry in the second column of the table.(7) The Secretary of State may by regulations amend Schedule 1 by adding, modifying or removing a reference to a specified authority or a local government area.12 Educational, prison and youth custody authorities(1) In this Chapter—  “educational authority” means a person listed in the first column of the first table in Schedule 2;  “prison authority” means a person listed in the first column of the second table in Schedule 2;  “youth custody authority” means a person listed in the first column of the third table in Schedule 2.(2) For the purposes of this Chapter an educational authority, prison authority or a youth custody authority listed in a table in Schedule 2 is an authority for the local government area or (as the case may be) each local government area listed in the corresponding entry in the second column of the table.(3) The Secretary of State may by regulations amend Schedule 2 by adding, modifying or removing an entry in a table in that Schedule.13 Preventing and reducing serious violence(1) In this Chapter—(a) references to preventing serious violence in an area are to preventing people from becoming involved in serious violence in the area, and(b) references to reducing serious violence in an area are to reducing instances of serious violence in the area.(a) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)	19PART 2 – Prevention, investigation and prosecution of crimeCHAPTER 1 – Functions relating to serious violence Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have beenmade appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(2) The reference in subsection (1)(a) to becoming involved in serious violence includes becoming a victim of serious violence.(3) In this Chapter “violence”—(a) includes, in particular—(i) domestic abuse within the meaning of the Domestic Abuse Act 2021 (see section 1 of that Act),(ii) sexual offences,(iii) violence against property, and(iv) threats of violence;(b) does not include terrorism (within the meaning of the Terrorism Act 2000 (see section 1(1) to (4) of that Act)).(4) In subsection (3)(a)(ii), “sexual offence” means an offence under the law of England and Wales which is for the time being specified in Schedule 3 to the Sexual Offences Act 2003, other than the offence specified in paragraph 14 of that Schedule (fraudulent evasion of excise duty).(5) In determining for the purposes of subsection (4) whether an offence is specified in Schedule 3 to the Sexual Offences Act 2003, any limitation in that Schedule referring to the circumstances of a particular case (including the sentence imposed) is to be disregarded.(6) In considering whether violence in an area amounts to serious violence for the purposes of this Chapter, account must be taken in particular of the following factors—(a) the maximum penalty which could be imposed for the offence (if any) involved in the violence,(b) the impact of the violence on any victim,(c) the prevalence of the violence in the area, and(d) the impact of the violence on the community in the area.Exercise of functions14 Involvement of local policing bodies(1) A local policing body for a police area may assist a specified authority in the exercise of—(a) the authority’s functions under or in accordance with section 8 in relation to a local government area which coincides with or falls within the police area, or(b) the authority’s functions under or in accordance with section 9 in relation to a relevant area which, or any part of which, coincides with or falls within the police area.(2) A local policing body for a police area may—(1) 
20	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 2 – Prevention, investigation and prosecution of crimeCHAPTER 1 – Functions relating to serious violenceDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(a) monitor the exercise by specified authorities of their functions under or in accordance with section 8 in relation to a local government area which coincides with or falls within the police area, or(b) monitor the exercise by specified authorities of their functions under or in accordance with section 9 in relation to a relevant area which, or any part of which, coincides with or falls within the police area.(3) A local policing body may report its findings under subsection (2) to the Secretary of State.(4) The Secretary of State may by regulations make provision conferring functions on a local policing body for a police area for the purposes of subsection (1).(5) Provision under subsection (4) may include provision—(a) for a local policing body to provide funding to a specified authority,(b) for a local policing body to arrange for meetings to be held for the purpose of assisting the exercise by specified authorities of their functions under or in accordance with section 8 or 9,(c) for the local policing body or a representative of the body to chair the meetings, and(d) for such descriptions and numbers of persons as the local policing body may specify to be required to attend the meetings.(6) If a local policing body acts under subsection (1) or (2), or under regulations under subsection (4), in relation to the exercise by a specified authority of its functions under or in accordance with section 8 or 9, the authority must co-operate with the body.(7) References in this Chapter (however expressed) to a specified authority exercising functions in accordance with section 8 or 9 are to the authority exercising functions conferred on it apart from this Chapter in accordance with the section in question.15 Involvement of educational, prison and youth custody authorities(1) An educational, prison or youth custody authority (a “relevant authority”) for a local government area and a specified authority for that area may collaborate with each other to prevent and reduce serious violence in that area.(2) A relevant authority for a relevant area and a specified authority for that area may collaborate with each other to prevent and reduce serious violence in that area.(3) A relevant authority and a specified authority must collaborate with each other as mentioned in subsection (1) or (2) if either the relevant authority or the specified authority requests the other to do so.(4) A relevant authority must carry out any actions which are specified under section 8(5) or 9(5) as actions to be carried out by the authority.(5) A relevant authority for a local government area—(1) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)	21PART 2 – Prevention, investigation and prosecution of crimeCHAPTER 1 – Functions relating to serious violence Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have beenmade appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(a) may collaborate with another relevant authority for that area to prevent and reduce serious violence in that area, and(b) must collaborate with another relevant authority for that area for those purposes if requested by that other relevant authority to do so.(6) A relevant authority (“RA1”) may collaborate with another relevant authority (“RA2”) to prevent and reduce serious violence in an area which is made up of—(a) all or part of the local government area for which RA1 is a relevant authority, and(b) all or part of the local government area for which RA2 is a relevant authority.(7) A relevant authority is not subject to a duty in subsection (3), (4) or (5)(b), and a specified authority is not subject to a duty in subsection (3), if or to the extent that compliance with the duty—(a) would be incompatible with any other duty of the authority imposed by an enactment (other than subsection (5)(b)),(b) would otherwise have an adverse effect on the exercise of the authority’s functions,(c) would be disproportionate to the need to prevent and reduce serious violence in the area to which the duty relates, or(d) would mean that the authority incurred unreasonable costs.(8) In determining whether subsection (7) applies to an authority, the cumulative effect of complying with duties under this section must be taken into account.(9) Subsection (7) or (8) does not apply in relation to the duty of a relevant authority to collaborate with a specified authority under subsection (3) to the extent that it relates to—(a) the exercise by the specified authority of its function under subsection (3)(a) or (b) of section 8 of identifying the kinds or causes of serious violence in an area or its function of preparing a strategy under subsection (3)(c) of that section, or(b) the exercise by the specified authority of its function under subsection (3)(a) or (b) of section 9 of identifying the kinds or causes of serious violence in an area or its function of preparing a strategy under subsection (3)(c) of that section.(10) This section does not affect any power to collaborate apart from this section.(11) In this section “enactment” includes—(a) an enactment comprised in subordinate legislation within the meaning of the Interpretation Act 1978, and(b) an enactment comprised in, or in an instrument made under, a Measure or Act of Senedd Cymru.
22	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 2 – Prevention, investigation and prosecution of crimeCHAPTER 1 – Functions relating to serious violenceDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes16 Disclosure of information(1) A person listed in subsection (2) may disclose information that it holds for the purposes of its functions to another person listed in that subsection for the purposes of the exercise by the other person of its functions under or in accordance with this Chapter.(2) Those persons are—(a) a specified authority;(b) a local policing body;(c) an educational authority;(d) a prison authority;(e) a youth custody authority.(3) A disclosure of information authorised by this section does not breach—(a) any obligation of confidence owed by the person making the disclosure, or(b) any other restriction on the disclosure of information (however imposed).(4) But this section does not authorise—(a) the disclosure of patient information,(b) the disclosure of personal information by a specified authority which is a health or social care authority,(c) a disclosure of information that would contravene the data protection legislation (but in determining whether a disclosure would do so, the power conferred by this section is to be taken into account), or(d) a disclosure of information that is prohibited by any of Parts 1 to 7 or Chapter 1 of Part 9 of the Investigatory Powers Act 2016.(5) Subsection (6) applies if—(a) a disclosure of information under this section is also permitted by regulations under section 6(2) of the Crime and Disorder Act 1998 or by section 115 of that Act (but is not also a disclosure under section 17A of that Act), and(b) a condition or limitation applies to a disclosure under those regulations or section 115 of that Act by virtue of such regulations.(6) The condition or limitation does not apply to the disclosure of information under this section.(7) This section does not otherwise affect any power to disclose information apart from this section.17 Supply of information to local policing bodies(1) A local policing body may, for the purposes of enabling or assisting it to exercise its functions under section 14 in relation to an area, request any person listed in subsection (2) to supply it with such information as may be specified in the request.(2) Those persons are—(1) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)	23PART 2 – Prevention, investigation and prosecution of crimeCHAPTER 1 – Functions relating to serious violence Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have beenmade appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(a) a specified authority for that area;(b) an educational authority for that area;(c) a prison authority for that area;(d) a youth custody authority for that area.(3) Information requested under subsection (1) must be information that is held by the person to whom the request is made and that relates to—(a) the person to whom the request was made,(b) a function of the person to whom the request was made, or(c) a person in respect of whom a function is exercisable by the person requested to supply the information.(4) Subject to subsection (6), a person who is requested to supply information under subsection (1) must comply with the request.(5) A disclosure of information required by subsection (4) does not breach—(a) any obligation of confidence owed by the person making the disclosure, or(b) any other restriction on the disclosure of information (however imposed).(6) But subsection (4) does not require—(a) the disclosure of patient information,(b) the disclosure of personal information by a specified authority which is a health or social care authority,(c) a disclosure of information that would contravene the data protection legislation (but in determining whether a disclosure would do so, the duty imposed by that subsection is to be taken into account), or(d) a disclosure of information that is prohibited by any of Parts 1 to 7 or Chapter 1 of Part 9 of the Investigatory Powers Act 2016.(7) Information supplied to a local policing body under this section may be used by the body only for the purpose of enabling or assisting it to exercise its functions under section 14.18 Directions(1) Subsection (2) applies if the Secretary of State is satisfied that—(a) a specified authority has failed to discharge a duty imposed on it by section 8, 14(6), 15(3) or 17(4), or(b) an educational authority, prison authority or youth custody authority has failed to discharge a duty imposed on it by section 15(3), (4) or (5)(b) or 17(4).(2) The Secretary of State may give directions to the authority for the purpose of securing compliance with the duty.(3) A direction under subsection (2) may be enforced, on an application made on behalf of the Secretary of State, by a mandatory order.(1) 
24	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 2 – Prevention, investigation and prosecution of crimeCHAPTER 1 – Functions relating to serious violenceDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(4) The Secretary of State must obtain the consent of the Welsh Ministers before giving a direction under this section to a devolved Welsh authority within the meaning of the Government of Wales Act 2006 (see section 157A of that Act).(5) This section does not apply in relation to—(a) a provider of probation services if that provider is the Secretary of State,(b) the governor of a prison, young offender institution or secure training centre, or(c) the principal of a directly managed secure college as defined in paragraph 27 of Schedule 10 to the Criminal Justice and Courts Act 2015.19 Guidance(1) A person listed in subsection (2) must have regard to guidance issued by the Secretary of State—(a) in exercising any function conferred by or by virtue of this Chapter, or(b) in exercising any function in accordance with this Chapter.(2) Those persons are—(a) a specified authority;(b) a person prescribed in regulations under section 10;(c) a local policing body;(d) an educational authority;(e) a prison authority;(f) a youth custody authority.(3) The Secretary of State must consult the Welsh Ministers before issuing guidance relating to the exercise of functions as mentioned in subsection (1) by a devolved Welsh authority within the meaning of the Government of Wales Act 2006 (see section 157A of that Act).(4) After issuing guidance under this section, the Secretary of State must lay a copy of the guidance before Parliament.Amendments to the Crime and Disorder Act 1998 etc20 Amendments to the Crime and Disorder Act 1998(1) The Crime and Disorder Act 1998 is amended as follows.(1) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)	25PART 2 – Prevention, investigation and prosecution of crimeCHAPTER 1 – Functions relating to serious violence Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have beenmade appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(2) In section 5A (combination agreements: further provision)—(a) in subsection (2), after paragraph (c) insert—“(d)	preventing people from becoming involved in serious violence;(e)	reducing instances of serious violence.”, and(b) after subsection (9) insert—“(10) References in this section to serious violence and to becoming involved in serious violence are to be construed in accordance with section 18.”(3) Section 6 (formulation and implementation of strategies) is amended in accordance with subsections (4) to (7).(4) In subsection (1), at the end of paragraph (c) insert “; and(d) a strategy for—(i) preventing people from becoming involved in serious violence in the area, and(ii) reducing instances of serious violence in the area.”(5) In subsection (6)—(a) omit the “or” at the end of paragraph (a), and(b) after paragraph (b) insert—“(c)	the prevention of people becoming involved in serious violence of a particular description; or(d)	the reduction of instances of serious violence of a particular description.”(6) In subsection (9), at the end of paragraph (a) insert “and strategies for preventing people from becoming involved in and reducing instances of serious violence in areas in Wales”.(7) After subsection (9) insert—“(10) The Secretary of State must consult the Welsh Ministers before making regulations under this section if and to extent that the regulations—(a) relate to a strategy within subsection (1)(d), and(b) make provision that applies in relation to a devolved Welsh authority within the meaning of the Government of Wales Act 2006 (see section 157A of that Act).(11) References in this section to serious violence and to becoming involved in serious violence are to be construed in accordance with section 18.”(8) Section 17 (duty to consider crime and disorder implications) is amended in accordance with subsections (9) to (11).(9) In subsection (1), at the end of paragraph (c) insert “; and(d)  serious violence in its area.”(10) After subsection (1) insert—(1) 
26	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 2 – Prevention, investigation and prosecution of crimeCHAPTER 1 – Functions relating to serious violenceDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes“(1A) The duty imposed on an authority by subsection (1) to do all it reasonably can to prevent serious violence in its area is a duty on the authority to do all it reasonably can to—(a) prevent people from becoming involved in serious violence in its area, and(b) reduce instances of serious violence in its area.”(11) After subsection (5) insert—“(6) References in this section to serious violence and to becoming involved in serious violence are to be construed in accordance with section 18.”(12) In section 18 (interpretation of Chapter 1)—(a) in subsection (1), at the appropriate place insert— ““violence”—(a) includes, in particular—(i) domestic abuse within the meaning of the Domestic Abuse Act 2021 (see section 1 of that Act),(ii) sexual offences,(iii) violence against property, and(iv) threats of violence;(b) does not include terrorism (within the meaning of the Terrorism Act 2000 (see section 1(1) to (4) of that Act)).”, and(b) after that subsection insert—“(1A) In the definition of “violence” in subsection (1) “sexual offence” means an offence under the law of England and Wales which is for the time being specified in Schedule 3 to the Sexual Offences Act 2003, other than the offence specified in paragraph 14 of that Schedule (fraudulent evasion of excise duty).(1B) In determining for the purposes of subsection (1A) whether an offence is specified in Schedule 3 to the Sexual Offences Act 2003, any limitation in that Schedule referring to the circumstances of a particular case (including the sentence imposed) is to be disregarded.(1C) References in this Chapter to becoming involved in serious violence include becoming a victim of serious violence.(1D) In considering whether violence in an area amounts to serious violence for the purposes of this Chapter account must be taken in particular of the following factors—(a) the maximum penalty which could be imposed for the offence (if any) involved in the violence,(b) the impact of the violence on any victim,(c) the prevalence of the violence in the area, and(d) the impact of the violence on the community in the area.”
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)	27PART 2 – Prevention, investigation and prosecution of crimeCHAPTER 1 – Functions relating to serious violence Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have beenmade appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes21 Amendment to the Police and Justice Act 2006In section 19(11) of the Police and Justice Act 2006 (local authority scrutiny of crime and disorder matters: interpretation), in the definition of “local crime and disorder matter”—(a) omit the “or” at the end of paragraph (a), and(b) at the end of paragraph (b) insert “or(c) serious violence (within the meaning of Chapter 1 of Part 1 of the Crime and Disorder Act 1998),”.General22 Regulations(1) Regulations under this Chapter are to be made by statutory instrument.(2) Regulations under this Chapter—(a) may make different provision for different purposes or areas;(b) may make consequential, supplementary, incidental, transitional, transitory or saving provision.(3) The Secretary of State must consult the Welsh Ministers before making regulations under this Chapter if and to extent that the regulations make provision that applies in relation to a devolved Welsh authority within the meaning of the Government of Wales Act 2006 (see section 157A of that Act).(4) A statutory instrument containing regulations under this Chapter may not be made unless a draft of the instrument has been laid before and approved by a resolution of each House of Parliament.(5) Subsection (4) does not apply to a statutory instrument containing only one or more of the following—(a) regulations under section 8(10);(b) regulations under section 9(10);(c) regulations under section 11(7) which make provision for the removal of an entry in Schedule 1 where the authority concerned has ceased to exist;(d) regulations under section 11(7) which make provision for the modification of an entry in Schedule 1 in consequence of a change of name or transfer of functions;(e) regulations under section 12(3) which make provision for the removal of an entry in Schedule 2 where the authority concerned has ceased to exist;(a) 
28	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 2 – Prevention, investigation and prosecution of crimeCHAPTER 1 – Functions relating to serious violenceDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(f) regulations under section 12(3) which make provision for the modification of an entry in Schedule 2 in consequence of a change of name or transfer of functions;(g) regulations under section 14(4).(6) A statutory instrument within subsection (5) is subject to annulment in pursuance of a resolution of either House of Parliament.23 Index of defined expressionsIn this Chapter an expression listed in the first column of the table has the meaning given by, or is to be interpreted in accordance with, the corresponding provision listed in the second column.ExpressionProvisionthe data protection legislationsection 10(10)educational authoritysection 12(1) and Schedule 2educational	authority	for	a	local government areasection 12(2) and Schedule 2educational authority for a relevant areasection 9(13)health or social care authoritysection 10(9)local government areasection 11(4)patient informationsection 10(9)personal informationsection 10(9)preventing serious violencesection 13(1) and (2)prison authoritysection 12(1) and Schedule 2prison authority for a local government areasection 12(2) and Schedule 2prison authority for a relevant areasection 9(13)reducing serious violencesection 13(1)relevant areasection 9(13)serious violencesection 13(6)specified authoritysection 11(1) and Schedule 1specified authority for a local government areasection 11(6) and Schedule 1specified authority for a relevant areasection 9(13)violencesection 13(3)
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)	29PART 2 – Prevention, investigation and prosecution of crimeCHAPTER 2 – Offensive weapons homicide reviews Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have beenmade appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesExpressionProvisionyouth custody authoritysection 12(1) and Schedule 2youth custody authority for a local government areasection 12(2) and Schedule 2youth custody authority for a relevant areasection 9(13)CHAPTER 2OFFENSIVE WEAPONS HOMICIDE REVIEWS24 Duty to arrange a review(1) Where a review partner considers that—(a) the death of a person was, or is likely to have been, a qualifying homicide,(b) the death occurred, or is likely to have occurred, in England or Wales,(c) such other conditions as the Secretary of State may specify by regulations are satisfied, including, for example, conditions relating to—(i) the circumstances of or relating to the death,(ii) the circumstances or history of the person who died, or(iii) the circumstances or history of other persons with a connection to the death, and(d) the review partner is one of the relevant review partners in respect of the death (see section 25),the review partner must join with the other relevant review partners in respect of the death in arranging for there to be a review under this section of the person’s death.(2) Subsection (1) is subject to subsections (3) to (5) and section 26.(3) If the review partner considers, on further information, that any of the conditions mentioned in subsection (1)(a) to (c) is not satisfied in the case of the person’s death, the review partner ceases to be under a duty to arrange for there to be a review under this section of the death (and a review may accordingly be discontinued).(4) If the review partner considers, on further information, that the condition mentioned in subsection (1)(d) is not satisfied in the case of the person’s death, the review partner ceases to be under a duty to arrange for there to be a review under this section of the death, except where such a review of the death has already started to take place under arrangements made by the review partner and other review partners.(5) Subsection (1) does not require a review partner to arrange for there to be a review under this section of a person’s death if such a review of the death has already taken place, or started to take place, under arrangements made by other review partners.(6) For the purposes of this section, the homicide of a person is a qualifying homicide if—(a) the person was aged 18 or over, and(a) 
30 Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 2 – Prevention, investigation and prosecution of crimeCHAPTER 2 – Offensive weapons homicide reviewsDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(b) the death, or the events surrounding it, involved the use of an offensive weapon.(7) The Secretary of State may by regulations—(a) amend this section so as to alter the meaning of “qualifying homicide”, and(b) make such consequential amendments of this Chapter as appear to the Secretary of State to be appropriate.(8) In this section “offensive weapon” has the same meaning as in section 1 of the Prevention of Crime Act 1953.25 Relevant review partners(1) The Secretary of State may by regulations make provision for identifying which review partners are to be the relevant review partners in respect of a person’s death.(2) The regulations may provide that the relevant review partners in respect of a person’s death are—(a) a chief officer of police for a police area in England or Wales of a description specified in the regulations,(b) a local authority of a description specified in the regulations or, in a case of a description specified in the regulations, a county council and a district council of a description specified in the regulations, and(c) [F1an integrated care board] or a local health board of a description specified in the regulations.(3) The regulations may, in particular, provide that, in a case of a description specified in the regulations, the relevant review partners in respect of a person’s death are—(a) the chief officer of police for the police area in England or Wales in which the death occurred or is likely to have occurred,(b) the local authority in whose area the death occurred or is likely to have occurred or, if the death occurred or is likely to have occurred within the area of a district council whose area is within the area of a county council, both of those local authorities, and(c) the [F2integrated care board] or the local health board in whose area the death occurred or is likely to have occurred.(4) The regulations may include provision for identifying the relevant review partners in respect of a person’s death by reference to other matters, including—(a) the last known place of residence of the person who died;(b) an earlier place of residence of the person who died;(c) the place of residence of the person who caused or is likely to have caused, or of any of the persons who caused or are likely to have caused, the person’s death;(d) the police area in England or Wales of the police force that is investigating or has investigated the person’s death.(a) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)	31PART 2 – Prevention, investigation and prosecution of crimeCHAPTER 2 – Offensive weapons homicide reviews Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have beenmade appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(5) The regulations may—(a) provide for a group of review partners to agree with another group of review partners to be the relevant review partners in respect of a person’s death instead of that other group;(b) provide for review partners of a description specified in the regulations to agree between them which of them is a relevant review partner in respect of a person’s death;(c) provide for the Secretary of State to give a direction specifying which review partners are the relevant review partners in respect of a person’s death.26 Relationship with other review requirements(1) The duty in section 24(1) does not apply in relation to a death if—(a) a child death review must or may be arranged in relation to the death (see section 16M(1) and (2) of the Children Act 2004),(b) the death may be the subject of a domestic homicide review (see section 9 of the Domestic Violence, Crime and Victims Act 2004), or(c) a safeguarding adults review must or may be established in relation to the death (see section 44(1) and (4) of the Care Act 2014).(2) The Secretary of State may by regulations make provision about the duty in section 24(1) not applying in the case of a death which may or must be investigated under arrangements made by NHS bodies with respect to deaths caused by persons who are receiving or have received any health services relating to mental health.(3) The duty in section 24(1) does not apply in relation to a death if regulations under section 135(4)(a) of the Social Services and Well-being (Wales) Act 2014 (anaw 4) require a Safeguarding Board to undertake a review of the death.(4) The Secretary of State may by regulations make provision about the duty in section 24(1) not applying in the case of a death, caused by a person who is receiving or has received any health services relating to mental health, where there may be a review of, or investigation into, the provision of that health care under section 70 of the Health and Social Care (Community Health and Standards) Act 2003.
32	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 2 – Prevention, investigation and prosecution of crimeCHAPTER 2 – Offensive weapons homicide reviewsDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes27 Notification of Secretary of State(1) If a review partner becomes aware of qualifying circumstances in relation to a person’s death, the review partner must notify the Secretary of State before the end of the notification period of one of the following—(a) that the review partner is under a duty to arrange for there to be a review under section 24 of the person’s death,(b) that the review partner is not under that duty in respect of the death, or(c) that the review partner has not been able to take a decision on the matter.(2) Subsection (1) does not apply if, when the review partner becomes aware of qualifying circumstances in relation to a person’s death, the review partner is also aware that no duty in section 24(1) arises in respect of the death because of section 24(5) or 26.(3) If a review partner gives a notification under subsection (1)(c), the review partner must notify the Secretary of State of the review partner’s decision on the matter once it has been taken.(4) Where a review partner—(a) notifies the Secretary of State that the review partner is under a duty to arrange a review under section 24 of a death, but(b) before the review starts to take place, decides that the review partner is not under that duty in respect of that death (see section 24(3) and (4)),the review partner must notify the Secretary of State of that decision.(5) Where a review under section 24 of a death is discontinued because the review partner considers that a condition mentioned in section 24(1)(a) to (c) is not satisfied in relation to the death (see section 24(3)), the review partner must notify the Secretary of State.(6) Where a review partner—(a) notifies the Secretary of State that the review partner is not under a duty to arrange a review under section 24 of a death, but(b) afterwards decides that the review partner is under that duty in respect of that death,the review partner must notify the Secretary of State of that decision.(7) For the purposes of this section, a review partner becomes aware of qualifying circumstances in relation to a person’s death if the review partner becomes aware of such facts as make it likely that—(a) the conditions mentioned in section 24(1)(a) and (b) are satisfied in relation to the death, and(b) the review partner is one of the relevant review partners in respect of the death.(8) In this section “the notification period”, in relation to notification by a review partner, means the period of one month beginning with the day on which the review partner becomes aware of qualifying circumstances in relation to the death in question.
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)	33PART 2 – Prevention, investigation and prosecution of crimeCHAPTER 2 – Offensive weapons homicide reviews Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have beenmade appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes28 Conduct of review(1) Where a review under section 24 of a person’s death takes place, the review partners that arranged it must co-operate in and contribute to the carrying out of the review.(2) The purposes of a review under section 24 are—(a) to identify the lessons to be learnt from the death, and(b) to consider whether it would be appropriate for anyone to take action in respect of those lessons learned.(3) Where the review partners consider that it would be appropriate for a person to take action as mentioned in subsection (2)(b), they must inform that person.(4) The review partners must prepare a report on the review and send it to the Secretary of State.(5) The report must include—(a) the findings of the review,(b) any conclusions drawn by the review partners, and(c) recommendations made in light of those findings and conclusions (including those referred to in subsection (3)).(6) The review partners must not include in the report sent to the Secretary of State material that they consider—(a) might jeopardise the safety of any person, or(b) might prejudice the investigation or prosecution of an offence.(7) The Secretary of State must publish, or make arrangements for the publication of, the report, unless the Secretary of State considers it inappropriate for the report to be published.(8) If the Secretary of State considers it inappropriate for the report to be published, the Secretary of State must publish, or make arrangements for the publication of, so much of the contents of the report as the Secretary of State considers appropriate to be published.Commencement InformationI50S. 28 not in force at Royal Assent, see ss. 34, 208(1)I51S. 28(1)-(6) in force at 1.4.2023 for specified purposes by S.I. 2023/227, reg. 3(1)(d) (with reg. 4)I52S. 28(7)(8) in force at 1.4.2023 for specified purposes by S.I. 2023/227, reg. 3(2)(a) (with reg. 4)29Information(1) A review partner may request a person to provide information specified in the request to the review partner or another review partner.(2) A review partner may make a request to a person under this section only if the conditions in subsections (3) and (4) are satisfied.(3) The condition in this subsection is that the request is made for the purpose of enabling or assisting the performance of functions conferred on a review partner by sections 24 to 28.(3) 
34	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 2 – Prevention, investigation and prosecution of crimeCHAPTER 2 – Offensive weapons homicide reviewsDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(4) The condition in this subsection is that the request is made to a person whose functions or activities are considered by the review partner to be such that the person is likely to have information that would enable or assist the performance of functions conferred on a review partner by sections 24 to 28.(5) The person to whom a request under this section is made must comply with the request.(6) The review partner that made the request may enforce the duty under subsection (5) against the person by making an application to the High Court or the county court for an injunction.(7) A review partner may provide information to another review partner for the purpose of enabling or assisting the performance of functions under sections 24 to 28.Commencement InformationI53S. 29 not in force at Royal Assent, see ss. 34, 208(1)I54S. 29(1)-(4)(7) in force at 1.4.2023 for specified purposes by S.I. 2023/227, reg. 3(1)(e) (with reg. 4)I55S. 29(5)(6) in force at 1.4.2023 for specified purposes by S.I. 2023/227, reg. 3(2)(b) (with reg. 4)30Information: supplementary(1) A person may not be required under section 29 to disclose information that the person could not be compelled to disclose in proceedings before the High Court.(2) A disclosure of information required or authorised by sections 27 to 29 does not breach—(a) any obligation of confidence owed by the person making the disclosure, or(b) any other restriction on the disclosure of information (however imposed).(3) But sections 27 to 29 do not require or authorise a disclosure of information that—(a) would contravene the data protection legislation (but in determining whether a disclosure would do so, the duty imposed or power conferred by the section in question is to be taken into account), or(b) is prohibited by any of Parts 1 to 7 or Chapter 1 of Part 9 of the Investigatory Powers Act 2016.(4) Sections 27 to 29 do not affect any duty or power to disclose information apart from those sections.(5) In this section “data protection legislation” has the same meaning as in the Data Protection Act 2018 (see section 3(9) of that Act).31 Delegating functions(1) The Secretary of State may by regulations make provision enabling the relevant review partners in respect of a person’s death to act jointly to appoint—(1) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)	35PART 2 – Prevention, investigation and prosecution of crimeCHAPTER 2 – Offensive weapons homicide reviews Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have beenmade appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(a) one of themselves, or(b) another person,to carry out on their behalf, in relation to the person’s death, one or more of the functions specified in the regulations.(2) Regulations under subsection (1) may specify some or all of the functions of a review partner under section 28 or 29 relating to a review under section 24 or a report on the review.(3) The Secretary of State may by regulations make provision enabling—(a) a county council, and(b) a district council for an area that is within the area of the county council,to agree that one of them carry out on behalf of the other one or more of the functions specified in the regulations.(4) Regulations under subsection (3) may specify some or all of the functions of a review partner under sections 24 to 29.32 Guidance(1) Review partners must have regard to any guidance issued by the Secretary of State in connection with functions conferred on them under sections 24 to 31.(2) Before issuing guidance under this section, the Secretary of State must consult—(a) persons appearing to the Secretary of State to represent review partners,(b) the Welsh Ministers, so far as the proposed guidance relates to a devolved Welsh authority, and(c) such other persons as the Secretary of State considers appropriate.(3) After issuing guidance under this section, the Secretary of State must lay a copy of the guidance before Parliament.33 Power to pay grant: local health boardsSection 31(2) to (5) of the Local Government Act 2003 (power of the Secretary of State to pay grant to local authorities in Wales) applies in relation to local health boards in Wales and expenditure incurred or to be incurred by those local health boards in the exercise of their functions under this Chapter as it applies in relation to local authorities in Wales and expenditure incurred or to be incurred by those local authorities.
36	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 2 – Prevention, investigation and prosecution of crimeCHAPTER 2 – Offensive weapons homicide reviewsDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes34 Piloting(1) The Secretary of State may exercise the power in section 208(1) so as to bring sections 24 to 30, 32 and 33 into force—(a) for all purposes, and  (b) in relation to the whole of England and Wales, only if the conditions in subsections (2) and (3) are met.(2) The condition in this subsection is that regulations under section 208(1) have brought some or all of sections 24 to 30, 32 and 33 into force only—(a) for one or more specified purposes, or(b) in relation to one or more specified areas.(3) The condition in this subsection is that the Secretary of State has laid before Parliament a report on the operation of some or all of the provisions of sections 24 to 31—(a) for one or more of those purposes, or(b) in relation to one or more of those areas.(4) Regulations under section 208(1) which bring any provision of sections 24 to 30, 32 and 33 into force only for a specified purpose or in relation to a specified area may—(a) provide for that provision to be in force for that purpose or in relation to that area for a specified period;(b) make transitional or saving provision in connection with that provision ceasing to be in force at the end of the specified period.(5) Regulations containing provision by virtue of subsection (4)(a) may be amended by subsequent regulations under section 208(1) so as to continue any provision of sections 24 to 30, 32 and 33 in force—(a) for the specified purpose, or  (b) in relation to the specified area, for a further specified period.(6) In this section “specified” means specified in regulations under section 208(1).35 Regulations(1) Regulations under this Chapter are to be made by statutory instrument.(2) Regulations under this Chapter—(a) may make different provision for different purposes and different provision for different areas;(a) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)	37PART 2 – Prevention, investigation and prosecution of crimeCHAPTER 2 – Offensive weapons homicide reviews Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have beenmade appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(b) may make consequential, supplementary, incidental, transitional, transitory or saving provision.(3) A statutory instrument containing regulations under this Chapter may not be made unless a draft of the instrument has been laid before and approved by a resolution of each House of Parliament.(4) Subsection (3) does not apply to a statutory instrument containing only regulations under section 26(2) or (4).(5) A statutory instrument within subsection (4) is subject to annulment in pursuance of a resolution of either House of Parliament.36 Interpretation(1) In this Chapter—F3...  “devolved Welsh authority” has the meaning given in section 157A of the Government of Wales Act 2006;  [F4“integrated care board” means a body established under section 14Z25 of the National Health Service Act 2006;]“local authority” means—(a) in relation to England—(i) a county council,(ii) a district council,(iii) a London borough council,(iv) the Common Council of the City of London in its capacity as a local authority, or(v) the Council of the Isles of Scilly;(b) in relation to Wales—(i) a county council, or(ii) a county borough council;  “local health board” means a local health board established under section 11 of the National Health Service (Wales) Act 2006;  “NHS body” has the same meaning as in the National Health Service Act 2006 (see section 275 of that Act);“review partner” means—(a) a chief officer of police for a police area in England or Wales,(b) a local authority,(c) [F5an integrated care board, or](d) a local health board;“relevant review partner” has the meaning given by section 25.(2) The Secretary of State may by regulations—(a) amend the definition of “review partner”, and(a) 
38	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 2 – Prevention, investigation and prosecution of crimeCHAPTER 3 – Extraction of information from electronic devicesDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(b) make such consequential amendments of this Chapter as appear to the Secretary of State to be appropriate.(3) Before making regulations under subsection (2), the Secretary of State must consult—(a) such persons as appear to the Secretary of State to represent review partners,(b) the Welsh Ministers, so far as the proposed regulations relate to a devolved Welsh authority, and(c) such other persons as the Secretary of State considers appropriate.CHAPTER 3EXTRACTION OF INFORMATION FROM ELECTRONIC DEVICES37 Extraction of information from electronic devices: investigations of crime etc(1) An authorised person may extract information stored on an electronic device from that device if—(a) a user of the device has voluntarily provided the device to an authorised person, and(b) that user has agreed to the extraction of information from the device by an authorised person.(2) The power in subsection (1) may be exercised only for the purposes of—(a) preventing, detecting, investigating or prosecuting crime,(b) helping to locate a missing person, or(c) protecting a child or an at-risk adult from neglect or physical, mental or emotional harm.(3) The reference in subsection (2) to crime is a reference to—(a) conduct which constitutes one or more criminal offences in any part of the United Kingdom, or(b) conduct which, if it took place in any part of the United Kingdom, would constitute one or more criminal offences.(4) For the purposes of subsection (2) an adult is an at-risk adult if the authorised person reasonably believes that the adult—(a) is experiencing, or at risk of, neglect or physical, mental or emotional harm, and(a) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)	39PART 2 – Prevention, investigation and prosecution of crimeCHAPTER 3 – Extraction of information from electronic devices Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have beenmade appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(b) is unable to protect themselves against the neglect or harm or the risk of it.(5) An authorised person may exercise the power in subsection (1) only if—(a) in a case where the authorised person proposes to exercise the power for a purpose within subsection (2)(a), the authorised person reasonably believes that information stored on the electronic device is relevant to a reasonable line of enquiry which is being, or is to be, pursued by an authorised person,(b) in a case where the authorised person proposes to exercise the power for a purpose within subsection (2)(b) or (c), the authorised person reasonably believes that information stored on the electronic device is relevant to that purpose, and(c) in any case, the authorised person is satisfied that exercise of the power is necessary and proportionate to achieve the purpose within subsection (2) for which the person proposes to exercise the power.(6) Subsection (7) applies if the authorised person thinks that, in exercising the power, there is a risk of obtaining information other than—(a) information necessary for a purpose within subsection (2) for which the authorised person may exercise the power, or(b) information necessary for a purpose within subsection (2) of section 41 (investigations of death) for which the authorised person may exercise the power in subsection (1) of that section.(7) The authorised person must, to be satisfied that the exercise of the power in subsection (1) is proportionate, be satisfied that—(a) there are no other means of obtaining the information sought by the authorised person which avoid that risk, or(b) there are such other means, but it is not reasonably practicable to use them.(8) Subsection (9) applies if the authorised person thinks that, in exercising the power in subsection (1), there is a risk of obtaining confidential information.(9) The authorised person must, to be satisfied that the exercise of the power is proportionate—(a) have regard to the matters in subsection (10), and(b) be satisfied that—(i) there are no other means of obtaining the information sought by the authorised person which avoid that risk, or(ii) there are such other means, but it is not reasonably practicable to use them.(10) The matters referred to in subsection (9)(a) are—(a) the amount of confidential information likely to be stored on the device, and(b) the potential relevance of the confidential information to—(i) a purpose within subsection (2) for which the authorised person may exercise the power, or(ii) a purpose within subsection (2) of section 41 for which the authorised person may exercise the power in subsection (1) of that section.(11) An authorised person must have regard to the code of practice for the time being in force under section 42 in exercising, or deciding whether to exercise, the power in subsection (1).(1) 
40	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 2 – Prevention, investigation and prosecution of crimeCHAPTER 3 – Extraction of information from electronic devicesDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(12) This section does not affect any power relating to the extraction or production of information, or any power to seize any item or obtain any information, conferred by an enactment or rule of law.(13) In this Chapter—“adult” means a person aged 18 or over;  “authorised person” has the meaning given by subsection (1) of section 44 (subject to subsections (2) and (3) of that section);“child” means a person aged under 18;“confidential information” has the meaning given by section 43; “criminal offence” includes—(a) a service offence within the meaning of the Armed Forces Act 2006, and(b) an SDA offence within the meaning of the Armed Forces Act 2006 (Transitional Provisions etc) Order 2009 (S.I. 2009/1059);  “electronic device” means any device on which information is capable of being stored electronically and includes any component of such a device;“enactment” includes—(a) an enactment contained in subordinate legislation within the meaning of the Interpretation Act 1978,(b) an enactment contained in, or in an instrument made under, an Act of the Scottish Parliament,(c) an enactment contained in, or in an instrument made under, an Act or Measure of Senedd Cymru, and(d) an enactment contained in, or in an instrument made under, Northern Ireland legislation;“information” includes moving or still images and sounds;  “user”, in relation to an electronic device, means a person who ordinarily uses the device.(14) References in this Chapter to the extraction of information include its reproduction in any form.(15) This section is subject to sections 38 (children, and adults without capacity), 39 (requirements for voluntary provision and agreement) and 40 (persons who have died etc).38 Application of section 37 to children and adults without capacity(1) A child is not to be treated for the purposes of section 37(1) as being capable of—(a) voluntarily providing an electronic device to an authorised person for those purposes, or(b) agreeing for those purposes to the extraction of information from the device by an authorised person.(a) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)	41PART 2 – Prevention, investigation and prosecution of crimeCHAPTER 3 – Extraction of information from electronic devices Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have beenmade appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(2) If a child is a user of an electronic device, a person who is not a user of the device but is listed in subsection (3) may—(a) voluntarily provide the device to an authorised person for the purposes of section 37(1), and(b) agree for those purposes to the extraction of information from the device by an authorised person.(3) The persons mentioned in subsection (2) are—(a) a parent or guardian of the child or, if the child is in the care of a relevant authority or voluntary organisation, a person representing that authority or organisation, or(b) if no person within paragraph (a) is available, any responsible person who is aged 18 or over other than a relevant authorised person.(4) Before exercising the power under section 37(1) by virtue of subsection (2), an authorised person must, so far as it is reasonably practicable to do so—(a) ascertain the views of the child, and(b) have regard to any views so ascertained, taking account of the child’s age and maturity.(5) If an authorised person (“A”) exercises the power under section 37(1) as a result of action taken under subsection (2) by a person within subsection (3)(b), A must, unless A considers that it is not appropriate to do so, inform a person within subsection (3)(a) that A has exercised the power.(6) An adult without capacity is not to be treated for the purposes of section 37(1) as being capable of—(a) voluntarily providing an electronic device to an authorised person for those purposes, or(b) agreeing for those purposes to the extraction of information from the device by an authorised person.(7) If a user of an electronic device is an adult without capacity, a person who is not a user of the device but is listed in subsection (8) may—(a) voluntarily provide the device to an authorised person for the purposes of section 37(1), and(b) agree for those purposes to the extraction of information from the device by an authorised person.(8) The persons mentioned in subsection (7) are—(a) a parent or guardian of the adult without capacity or, if the adult without capacity is in the care of a relevant authority or voluntary organisation, a person representing that authority or organisation,(b) a registered social worker,(c) a person who, under a power of attorney, may make decisions for the purposes of subsection (7)(a) and (b) on behalf of the adult without capacity,(d) a deputy appointed under section 16 of the Mental Capacity Act 2005 or section 113 of the Mental Capacity Act (Northern Ireland) 2016 who may make decisions for the purposes of subsection (7)(a) and (b) on behalf of the adult without capacity by virtue of that appointment,(e) a person authorised under an intervention order under section 53 of the Adults with Incapacity (Scotland) Act 2000 (asp 4) who may make decisions for the(a) 
42	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 2 – Prevention, investigation and prosecution of crimeCHAPTER 3 – Extraction of information from electronic devicesDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changespurposes of subsection (7)(a) and (b) on behalf of the adult without capacity by virtue of that authorisation, or(f) if no person within any of paragraphs (a) to (e) is available, any responsible person who is aged 18 or over other than a relevant authorised person.(9) Nothing in this section prevents any other user of an electronic device who is not a child or an adult without capacity from—(a) voluntarily providing the device to an authorised person for the purposes of section 37(1), or(b) agreeing for those purposes to the extraction of information from the device by an authorised person.(10) For the purposes of this Chapter a person is an adult without capacity if—(a) in relation to England and Wales, the person is an adult who, within the meaning of the Mental Capacity Act 2005, lacks capacity to do the things mentioned in section 37(1)(a) and (b);(b) in relation to Scotland, the person is an adult (within the meaning of this Chapter) who is incapable within the meaning of the Adults with Incapacity (Scotland) Act 2000 in relation to the matters mentioned in section 37(1)(a) and (b);(c) in relation to Northern Ireland, the person is an adult who, within the meaning of the Mental Capacity Act (Northern Ireland) 2016, lacks capacity to do the things mentioned in section 37(1)(a) and (b).(11) In this Chapter—“local authority”—(a) in relation to England, means a county council, a district council for an area for which there is no county council, a London borough council or the Common Council of the City of London in its capacity as a local authority;(b) in relation to Wales, means a county council or a county borough council;(c) in relation to Scotland, means a council constituted under section 2 of the Local Government etc (Scotland) Act 1994;  “registered social worker” means a person registered as a social worker in a register maintained by—(a) Social Work England,(b) the Care Council for Wales,(c) the Scottish Social Services Council, or(d) the Northern Ireland Social Care Council;  “relevant authorised person”, in relation to the extraction of information from an electronic device for a particular purpose, means an authorised person who may extract the information from the device for that purpose;“relevant authority”—(a) in relation to England and Wales and Scotland, means a local authority;(b) in relation to Northern Ireland, means an authority within the meaning of the Children (Northern Ireland) Order 1995 (S.I. 1995/755 (N.I. 2));“voluntary organisation”—(a) in relation to England and Wales, has the same meaning as in the Children Act 1989;(a) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)	43PART 2 – Prevention, investigation and prosecution of crimeCHAPTER 3 – Extraction of information from electronic devices Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have beenmade appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(b) in relation to Scotland, has the same meaning as in Part 2 of the Children (Scotland) Act 1995;(c) in relation to Northern Ireland, has the same meaning as in the Children (Northern Ireland) Order 1995.(12) This section is subject to section 39 (requirements for voluntary provision and agreement).39 Requirements for voluntary provision and agreement(1) A person (“P”) is to be treated for the purposes of section 37 or 38 as having—(a) voluntarily provided an electronic device to an authorised person, and(b) agreed to the extraction of information from the device by an authorised person,only if the requirements of this section have been met.(2) An authorised person must not have placed undue pressure on P to provide the device or agree to the extraction of information from it.(3) An authorised person must have given P notice in writing—(a) specifying or describing the information that is sought,(b) specifying the reason why the information is sought,(c) specifying how the information will be dealt with once it has been extracted,(d) stating that P may refuse to provide the device or agree to the extraction of information from it, and(e) stating that the investigation or enquiry for the purposes of which the information is sought will not be brought to an end merely because P refuses to provide the device or agree to the extraction of information from it.(4) Subject to subsection (5), P must have confirmed in writing that P has—(a) voluntarily provided the device to an authorised person, and(b) agreed to the extraction of information from the device by an authorised person.(5) If P was unable to provide that confirmation in writing as a result of P’s physical impairment or lack of literacy skills—(a) P must have given that confirmation orally, and(b) an authorised person must have recorded P’s confirmation in writing.(6) If P’s confirmation was given in writing and in hard copy form, the authorised person must have given P a copy of that confirmation (in hard copy or electronic form).(7) If P’s confirmation was given orally, the authorised person must have given P a copy of the record of that confirmation (in hard copy or electronic form).(1) 
44	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 2 – Prevention, investigation and prosecution of crimeCHAPTER 3 – Extraction of information from electronic devicesDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes40 Application of section 37 where user has died etc(1) If any of conditions A to C is met, an authorised person may exercise the power in section 37(1) to extract information stored on an electronic device from that device even though—(a) the device has not been voluntarily provided to an authorised person by a user of the device, or(b) no user of the device has agreed to the extraction of information from the device by an authorised person.(2) Condition A is that—(a) a person who was a user of the electronic device has died, and(b) the person was a user of the device immediately before their death.(3) Condition B is that—(a) a user of the electronic device is a child or an adult without capacity, and(b) an authorised person reasonably believes that the user’s life is at risk or there is a risk of serious harm to the user.(4) Condition C is that—(a) a person who was a user of the electronic device is missing,(b) the person was a user of the device immediately before they went missing, and(c) an authorised person reasonably believes that the person’s life is at risk or there is a risk of serious harm to the person.(5) The exercise of the power in subsection (1) of section 37 by virtue of this section is subject to that section.41 Extraction of information from electronic devices: investigations of death(1) An authorised person may extract information stored on an electronic device from that device if—(a) a person who was a user of the electronic device has died, and(b) the person was a user of the device immediately before their death.(2) The power in subsection (1) may be exercised only for the purposes of—(a) an investigation into the person’s death under Chapter 1 of Part 1 of the Coroners and Justice Act 2009,(b) an inquest into the person’s death under the Coroners Act (Northern Ireland) 1959, or(a) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)	45PART 2 – Prevention, investigation and prosecution of crimeCHAPTER 3 – Extraction of information from electronic devices Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have beenmade appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(c) an investigation into the person’s death by the Lord Advocate.(3) References in subsection (2) to the exercise of the power in subsection (1) for the purposes of an investigation or inquest include references to the exercise of that power for the purposes of determining whether an investigation should be conducted or an inquest should be held.(4) An authorised person may exercise the power in subsection (1) only if—(a) the authorised person reasonably believes that information stored on the electronic device is relevant to a purpose within subsection (2), and(b) the authorised person is satisfied that exercise of the power is necessary and proportionate to achieve that purpose.(5) Subsection (6) applies if the authorised person thinks that, in exercising the power, there is a risk of obtaining information other than—(a) information necessary for a purpose within subsection (2), or(b) information necessary for a purpose within section 37(2).(6) The authorised person must, to be satisfied that the exercise of the power is proportionate, be satisfied that—(a) there are no other means of obtaining the information sought by the authorised person which avoid that risk, or(b) there are such other means, but it is not reasonably practicable to use them.(7) Subsection (8) applies if the authorised person thinks that, in exercising the power in subsection (1), there is a risk of obtaining confidential information.(8) The authorised person must, to be satisfied that the exercise of the power is proportionate—(a) have regard to the matters in subsection (9), and(b) be satisfied that—(i) there are no other means of obtaining the information sought by the authorised person which avoid that risk, or(ii) there are such other means, but it is not reasonably practicable to use them.(9) The matters referred to in subsection (8)(a) are—(a) the amount of confidential information likely to be stored on the device, and(b) the potential relevance of the confidential information to a purpose within subsection (2) or section 37(2).(10) An authorised person must have regard to the code of practice for the time being in force under section 42 in exercising, or deciding whether to exercise, the power in subsection (1).(11) This section does not affect any power relating to the extraction or production of information, or any power to seize any item or obtain any information, conferred by an enactment or rule of law.
46	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 2 – Prevention, investigation and prosecution of crimeCHAPTER 3 – Extraction of information from electronic devicesDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes42 Code of practice about the extraction of information(1) The Secretary of State must prepare a code of practice containing guidance about the exercise of the powers in sections 37(1) and 41(1).(2) The code may make different provision for different purposes or areas.(3) In preparing the code, the Secretary of State must consult—(a) the Information Commissioner,(b) the Scottish Ministers,(c) the Department of Justice in Northern Ireland,(d) the Commissioner for Victims and Witnesses,(e) the Domestic Abuse Commissioner,(f) the Commission for Victims and Survivors for Northern Ireland, and(g) such other persons as the Secretary of State considers appropriate.(4) Subsection (3)(f) does not apply on or after the day appointed under Article 4(4) of the Victims and Survivors (Northern Ireland) Order 2006 (S.I. 2006/2953 (N.I. 17)) (power to revoke Article 4).(5) After preparing the code, the Secretary of State must lay it before Parliament and publish it.(6) The code is to be brought into force by regulations made by statutory instrument.(7) A statutory instrument containing regulations under subsection (6) is subject to annulment in pursuance of a resolution of either House of Parliament.(8) After the code has come into force the Secretary of State may from time to time revise it.(9) A failure on the part of an authorised person to act in accordance with the code does not of itself render the person liable to any criminal or civil proceedings.(10) But the code is admissible in evidence in criminal or civil proceedings and a court may take into account a failure to act in accordance with it in determining a question in the proceedings.(11) References in subsections (2) to (10) to the code include a revised code, subject to subsection (12).(12) The duty to consult in subsection (3) does not apply in relation to the preparation of a revised code if the Secretary of State considers that the proposed revisions are insubstantial.Commencement InformationI76S. 42 not in force at Royal Assent, see s. 208(1)I77S. 42(1)-(7) in force at 12.5.2022 by S.I. 2022/520, reg. 4(a)I78S. 42(8)-(12) in force at 8.11.2022 by S.I. 2022/1075, reg. 5(f)43Confidential information(1) In this Chapter “confidential information” means information which constitutes or may constitute—(1) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)	47PART 2 – Prevention, investigation and prosecution of crimeCHAPTER 3 – Extraction of information from electronic devices Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have beenmade appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(a) confidential journalistic material within the meaning of the Investigatory Powers Act 2016 (see section 264(6) and (7) of that Act), or(b) protected material.(2) In subsection (1)(b) “protected material”—(a) in relation to England and Wales means—(i) items subject to legal privilege, within the meaning of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 (see section 10 of that Act),(ii) material falling within section 11(1)(a) of that Act (certain personal records held in confidence), or(iii) material to which section 14(2) of that Act applies (other material acquired in the course of a trade etc that is held in confidence);(b) in relation to Scotland means—(i) items in respect of which a claim to confidentiality of communications could be maintained in legal proceedings, or(ii) other material of a kind mentioned in paragraph (a)(ii) or (iii) of this subsection;(c) in relation to Northern Ireland, means—(i) items subject to legal privilege, within the meaning of the Police and Criminal Evidence (Northern Ireland) Order 1989 (S.I. 1989/1341 (N.I. 12)) (see Article 12 of that Order),(ii) material falling with Article 13(1)(a) of that Order (certain personal records held in confidence), or(iii) material to which Article 16(2) of that Order applies (other material acquired in the course of a trade etc that is held in confidence).44 Authorised persons(1) Subject to subsections (2) and (3), in this Chapter “authorised person” means a person listed in Schedule 3.(2) The power in subsection (1) of section 37 may be exercised for a purpose mentioned in subsection (2)(b) or (c) of that section only by a person listed in Part 1 or 2 of Schedule 3.(3) The power in section 41(1) may be exercised only by a person listed in Part 1 of Schedule 3.(4) The Secretary of State may by regulations made by statutory instrument amend Schedule 3—(a) so as to add a reference to a person;(b) so as to remove a reference to a person;(c) so as to modify a description of a person mentioned in that Schedule.(5) Regulations under subsection (4) may contain transitional, transitory or saving provision.(2) 
48	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 2 – Prevention, investigation and prosecution of crime CHAPTER 4 – Other provisions Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(6) The Secretary of State must consult the Scottish Ministers before making regulations under subsection (4) if and so far as the regulations make provision that would be within the legislative competence of the Scottish Parliament if it were contained in an Act of that Parliament.(7) The Secretary of State must consult the Department of Justice in Northern Ireland before making regulations under subsection (4) if and so far as the regulations make provision that, if it were contained in an Act of the Northern Ireland Assembly—(a) would be within the legislative competence of that Assembly, and(b) would not require the consent of the Secretary of State.(8) Subject to subsection (9), a statutory instrument containing regulations under subsection (4)(a) (whether alone or with other provision) may not be made unless a draft of the instrument has been laid before and approved by a resolution of each House of Parliament.(9) Subsection (8) does not apply to a statutory instrument containing regulations which—(a) remove a reference to a person from Part 1 of Schedule 3 and add a reference to that person to Part 2 or 3 of that Schedule, or(b) remove a reference to a person from Part 2 of that Schedule and add a reference to that person to Part 3 of that Schedule.(10) A statutory instrument containing—(a) regulations under subsection (4)(a) to which subsection (9) applies, or(b) regulations under subsection (4)(b) or (c),and which is not a statutory instrument to which subsection (8) applies is subject to annulment in pursuance of a resolution of either House of Parliament.CHAPTER 4OTHER PROVISIONSPre-charge bail45 Pre-charge bail(1) Schedule 4 contains amendments relating to pre-charge bail.(2) In that Schedule—(a) Part 1 makes provision relating to the grant of pre-charge bail,(b) Part 2 makes provision about the factors to be taken into account in determining whether to grant pre-charge bail,(c) Part 3 makes provision requiring the views of alleged victims to be sought in relation to the grant or variation of pre-charge bail subject to conditions,(a) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)	49PART 2 – Prevention, investigation and prosecution of crimeCHAPTER 4 – Other provisions Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have beenmade appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(d) Part 4 makes provision relating to limits on periods of pre-charge bail,(e) Part 5 makes provision about the determination of a period of police detention following a person’s arrest for breach of pre-charge bail, and(f) Part 6 makes provision for guidance about pre-charge bail.(3) An amendment made by Schedule 4—(a) applies in relation to a person arrested for an offence only if the person was arrested for the offence after the coming into force of that amendment,(b) applies in relation to a person arrested under section 46A of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 (failure to answer to police bail etc) only if the person was arrested after the coming into force of that amendment for the offence for which the person was originally released on bail, and(c) applies in relation to a person arrested under section 24A of the Criminal Justice Act 2003 (failure to comply with conditional caution) only if the person was arrested after the coming into force of that amendment for the offence in respect of which the caution was given.Sexual offences46 Arranging or facilitating commission of a child sex offence(1) Section 14 of the Sexual Offences Act 2003 (arranging or facilitating commission of a child sex offence) is amended in accordance with subsections (2) and (3).(2) In subsection (1), in paragraph (b), for “9” substitute “5”.(3) In subsection (4), for paragraphs (a) and (b) substitute “to the penalty to which the person would be liable on conviction of the offence within subsection (1)(b)”.47 Positions of trust(1) The Sexual Offences Act 2003 is amended as follows.(2) After section 22 insert—“22A Further positions of trust(1) For the purposes of sections 16 to 19, a person (A) is in a position of trust in relation to another person (B) if—(1) 
50	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 2 – Prevention, investigation and prosecution of crime CHAPTER 4 – Other provisions Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(a) A coaches, teaches, trains, supervises or instructs B, on a regular basis, in a sport or a religion, and(b) A knows that they coach, teach, train, supervise or instruct B, on a regular basis, in that sport or religion.(2) In subsection (1)—“sport” includes—(a) any game in which physical skill is the predominant factor, and(b) any form of physical recreation which is also engaged in for purposes of competition or display;“religion” includes—(a) a religion which involves belief in more than one god, and(b) a religion which does not involve belief in a god.(3) This section does not apply where a person (A) is in a position of trust in relation to another person (B) by virtue of circumstances within section 21.(4) The Secretary of State may by regulations amend subsections (1) and (2) to add or remove an activity in which a person may be coached, taught, trained, supervised or instructed.”(3) In section 138(2) (orders and regulations) after “section 21,” insert “22A,”.48 Voyeurism: breast-feeding(1) Section 67A of the Sexual Offences Act 2003 (voyeurism: additional offences) is amended as follows.(2) After subsection (2) insert—“(2A) A person (A) commits an offence if—(a) A operates equipment,(b) A does so with the intention of enabling A or another person (C), for a purpose mentioned in subsection (3), to observe another (B) while B is breast-feeding a child, and(c) A does so—(i) without B’s consent, and(ii) without reasonably believing that B consents.(2B) A person (A) commits an offence if—(a) A records an image of another (B) while B is breast-feeding a child,(b) A does so with the intention that A or another person (C) will look at the image for a purpose mentioned in subsection (3), and(c) A does so—(i) without B’s consent, and(ii) without reasonably believing that B consents.”(i) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)	51PART 2 – Prevention, investigation and prosecution of crimeCHAPTER 4 – Other provisions Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have beenmade appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(3) In subsection (3), for “and (2)” substitute “to (2B)”.(4) After subsection (3) insert—“(3A) In this section a reference to B breast-feeding a child includes B re-arranging B’s clothing—(a) in the course of preparing to breast-feed the child, or(b) having just finished breast-feeding the child.(3B) It is irrelevant for the purposes of subsections (2A) and (2B)—(a) whether or not B is in a public place while B is breast-feeding the child,(b) whether or not B’s breasts are exposed while B is breast-feeding the child, and(c) what part of B’s body—(i) is, or is intended by A to be, visible in the recorded image, or(ii) is intended by A to be observed.”Domestic abuse49 Time limit for prosecution of common assault or battery in domestic abuse casesAfter section 39 of the Criminal Justice Act 1988 insert—“39A Time limit for prosecution of common assault or battery in domestic abuse cases(1) This section applies to proceedings for an offence of common assault or battery where—(a) the alleged behaviour of the accused amounts to domestic abuse, and(b) the condition in subsection (2) or (3) is met.(2) The condition in this subsection is that—(a) the complainant has made a witness statement with a view to its possible admission as evidence in the proceedings, and(b) the complainant has provided the statement to—(i) a constable of a police force, or(ii) a person authorised by a constable of a police force to receive the statement.(3) The condition in this subsection is that—(a) the complainant has been interviewed by—(i) a constable of a police force, or(i) 
52	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 2 – Prevention, investigation and prosecution of crime CHAPTER 4 – Other provisions Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(ii) a person authorised by a constable of a police force to interview the complainant, and(b) a video recording of the interview has been made with a view to its possible admission as the complainant’s evidence in chief in the proceedings.(4) Proceedings to which this section applies may be commenced at any time which is both—(a) within two years from the date of the offence to which the proceedings relate, and(b) within six months from the first date on which either of the conditions in subsection (2) or (3) was met.(5) This section has effect despite section 127(1) of the Magistrates’ Court Act 1980 (limitation of time).(6) In this section—  “domestic abuse” has the meaning given by section 1 of the Domestic Abuse Act 2021;  “police force” has the meaning given by section 3(3) of the Prosecution of Offences Act 1985;  “video recording” has the meaning given by section 63(1) of the Youth Justice and Criminal Evidence Act 1999;  “witness statement” means a written statement that satisfies the conditions in section 9(2)(a) and (b) of the Criminal Justice Act 1967.(7) This section does not apply in relation to an offence committed before the coming into force of section 49 of the Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022.”Criminal damage to memorials50 Criminal damage to memorials: mode of trial(1) In Schedule 2 to the Magistrates’ Courts Act 1980 (offences for which the value involved is relevant to the mode of trial), in paragraph 1 (offences under section 1 of the Criminal Damage Act 1971), in the first column, for the words from “any offence” to the end substitute“—(a) any offence committed by destroying or damaging property by fire, and(b) any offence committed by destroying or damaging a memorial (see section 22(11A) to (11D)).”(2) In section 22 of that Act, after subsection (11) insert—(1) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)	53PART 2 – Prevention, investigation and prosecution of crimeCHAPTER 4 – Other provisions Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have beenmade appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes“(11A) In paragraph 1 of Schedule 2 “memorial” means—(a) a building or other structure, or any other thing, erected or installed on land (or in or on any building or other structure on land), or  (b) a garden or any other thing planted or grown on land, which has a commemorative purpose.(11B) For the purposes of that paragraph, any moveable thing (such as a bunch of flowers) which—(a) is left in, on or at a memorial within the meaning of subsection (11A), and(b) has (or can reasonably be assumed to have) a commemorative purpose,is also to be regarded as a memorial.(11C) For the purposes of subsections (11A) and (11B)—(a) references to a building or a structure include a reference to part of a building or part of a structure (as the case may be), and(b) something has a commemorative purpose if at least one of its purposes is to commemorate—(i) one or more individuals or animals (or a particular description of individuals or animals), or(ii) an event or a series of events (such as an armed conflict).(11D) It is immaterial for the purposes of subsection (11C)(b)(i) whether or not any individuals or animals concerned are or were (at any material time)—(a) living or deceased, or(b) capable of being identified.”(3) The amendments made by this section do not apply in relation to offences committed before it comes into force.Overseas production orders51 Overseas production ordersSchedule 5 contains amendments to the Crime (Overseas Production Orders) Act 2019.
54	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 2 – Prevention, investigation and prosecution of crime CHAPTER 4 – Other provisions Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesAmendments to the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 etc52 Power to photograph certain persons at a police station(1) The Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 is amended as follows.(2) In section 64A (photographing of suspects etc.), after subsection (1B) insert—“(1C) A person to whom subsection (1) or (1A) does not apply may be photographed at a police station without the appropriate consent if that person falls within subsection (1D), (1F) or (1H).(1D) A person falls within this subsection if (before or after the coming into force of this subsection) that person has been—(a) arrested for a recordable offence and released,(b) charged with a recordable offence, or(c) informed that they will be reported for such an offence,and either of the conditions in subsection (1E) is met in relation to that person.(1E) The conditions referred to in subsection (1D) are—(a) that the person has not been photographed in the course of the investigation of the offence by the police, or(b) that the person has been so photographed but—(i) any photograph taken on such a previous occasion is unavailable or inadequate, and(ii) a constable considers that taking a further photograph is necessary to assist in the prevention or detection of crime.(1F) A person falls within this subsection if (before or after the coming into force of this subsection) that person has been—(a) convicted of a recordable offence, or(b) given a caution in respect of a recordable offence which, at the time of the caution they have admitted,and either of the conditions in subsection (1G) is met in relation to that person.(1G) The conditions referred to in subsection (1F) are—(a) that the person has not been photographed since being convicted or cautioned, or(b) that the person has been so photographed but—(i) any photograph taken on such a previous occasion is unavailable or inadequate, and(ii) a constable considers that taking a further photograph is necessary to assist in the prevention or detection of crime.(1H) A person falls within this subsection if—(a) under the law in force in a country or territory outside England and Wales the person has been convicted of an offence under that law (whether before or after the coming into force of this subsection and whether or not they have been punished for it),(b) the act constituting the offence would constitute a qualifying offence if done in England and Wales (whether or not it constituted such an offence when the person was convicted), and(a) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)	55PART 2 – Prevention, investigation and prosecution of crimeCHAPTER 4 – Other provisions Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have beenmade appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(c) either of the conditions in subsection (1I) is met in relation to that person.(1I) The conditions referred to in subsection (1H) are—(a) that the person has not been photographed on a previous occasion by virtue of being a person falling within subsection (1H), or(b) that the person has been so photographed but—(i) any photograph taken on such a previous occasion is unavailable or inadequate, and(ii) a constable considers that taking a further photograph is necessary to assist in the prevention or detection of crime.(1J) A person who falls within subsection (1F) or (1H) may be photographed under subsection (1C) only with the authorisation of an officer of at least the rank of inspector.(1K) An officer may only give an authorisation under subsection (1J) if the officer is satisfied that taking the photograph is necessary to assist in the prevention or detection of crime.(1L) In subsections (1E), (1G) and (1I)—(a) references to a photograph being unavailable include references to a photograph being lost or destroyed, and(b) references to a photograph being inadequate include references to a photograph being—(i) unclear,(ii) an incomplete photograph of the subject, or(iii) no longer an accurate representation of the subject’s appearance.(1M) In subsections (1E), (1G), (1I) and (1K) references to crime include references to any conduct which—(a) constitutes one or more criminal offences (whether under the law of a part of the United Kingdom or of a country or territory outside the United Kingdom), or(b) is, or corresponds to, any conduct which, if it all took place in any one part of the United Kingdom, would constitute one or more criminal offences.”(3) Schedule 2A (fingerprinting and samples: power to require attendance at police station) is amended in accordance with subsections (4) to (8).(4) In the heading of the Schedule, for “and samples” substitute “, samples and photographs”.(5) After Part 3 insert—(1) 
56	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 3A – Photographs CHAPTER 4 – Other provisions Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes“PART 3APHOTOGRAPHSPersons arrested and released14A	(1) A constable may require a person who falls within section 64A(1D)(a) to attend a police station to be photographed under section 64A(1C).(2) The power under sub-paragraph (1) may not be exercised in a case where section 64A(1E)(b) applies (photograph taken on a previous occasion unavailable or inadequate) after the end of the period of six months beginning with the day on which the appropriate officer was informed that section 64(1E)(b)(i) applied.(3) In sub-paragraph (2) the “appropriate officer” means the officer investigating the offence for which the person was arrested.Persons charged etc.14B	(1) A constable may require a person who falls within section 64A(1D)(b) or(c) to attend a police station to be photographed under section 64A(1C).(2) The power under sub-paragraph (1) may not be exercised after the end of the period of six months beginning with—(a) in a case where section 64A(1E)(a) applies (photograph not previously taken), the day on which the person was charged or informed that they would be reported, or(b) in a case where section 64A(1E)(b) applies (photograph taken on a previous occasion unavailable or inadequate), the day on which the appropriate officer was informed that section 64A(1E)(b)(i) applied.(3) In sub-paragraph (2)(b) the “appropriate officer” means the officer investigating the offence for which the person was charged or informed that they would be reported.Persons convicted of an offence etc. in England and Wales14C	(1) A constable may require a person who falls within section 64A(1F) to attend a police station to be photographed under section 64A(1C).(2) Where section 64A(1G)(a) applies (photographs not previously taken), the power under sub-paragraph (1) may not be exercised after the end of the period of two years beginning with—(a) the day on which the person was convicted or cautioned, or(b) if later, the day on which this Part comes into force.(3) Where section 64A(1G)(b) applies (photograph taken on previous occasion unavailable or inadequate), the power under sub-paragraph (1) may not be exercised after the end of the period of two years beginning with—(2) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)	57PART 3A – PhotographsCHAPTER 4 – Other provisions Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have beenmade appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(a) the day on which an appropriate officer was informed that section 64A(1G)(b)(i) applied, or(b) if later, the day on which this Part comes into force.(4) In sub-paragraph (3)(a), “appropriate officer” means an officer of the police force which investigated the offence in question.(5) Sub-paragraphs (2) and (3) do not apply where the offence is a qualifying offence (whether or not it was such an offence at the time of the conviction or caution).Persons convicted of an offence etc. outside England and Wales14D	A constable may require a person falling within section 64A(1H) to attend at a police station to be photographed under section 64A(1C).Multiple exercise of power14E (1) Where a photograph is taken of a person under section 64A on two occasions in relation to any offence, the person may not under this Schedule be required to attend a police station to be photographed under that section in relation to that offence on a subsequent occasion without the authorisation of an officer of at least the rank of inspector.(2) Where an authorisation is given under sub-paragraph (1)—(a) the fact of the authorisation, and(b) the reasons for giving it,must be recorded as soon as practicable after it has been given.”(6) In the italic heading before paragraph 15 (requirement to have power to take fingerprints or sample), for “or sample” substitute “, sample or photograph”.(7) In paragraph 15—(a) for “or a sample” substitute “, a sample or a photograph”, and(b) for “or sample”, in both places it occurs, substitute “, sample or photograph”.(8) In paragraph 16(2) (date and time of attendance), for “or sample” substitute “, sample or photograph”.53 Power to specify date of attendance at police station for fingerprinting etc(1) Paragraph 16 of Schedule 2A to the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 (attendance at police station for fingerprinting and taking of samples: date and time of attendance) is amended as follows.(2) For sub-paragraph (1) substitute—“(1) A requirement under this Schedule—
58	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 3A – Photographs CHAPTER 4 – Other provisions Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(a) must direct the person to attend the police station on a specified date, and(b) may either direct the person to attend the police station at a specified time on that date or direct the person to attend the police station between specified times on that date.”(3) In sub-paragraph (2), for “period or time or times of day” substitute “date, time or times”.(4) Omit sub-paragraphs (3) and (4).(5) In sub-paragraph (5), for “any period within which, or date or time at which,” substitute “any date, time at which or times between which”.(6) The amendments made by this section apply only in relation to a requirement to attend a police station given under Schedule 2A to the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 after the coming into force of this section.54 PACE etc powers for food crime officers(1) In the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984, after section 114B insert—“114C Power to apply Act to food crime officers(1) The Secretary of State may by regulations apply any provision of this Act which relates to investigations of offences conducted by police officers to investigations of offences conducted by food crime officers.(2) The regulations may apply provisions of this Act with any modifications specified in the regulations.(3) In this section “food crime officer” means an officer of the Food Standards Agency who—(a) is acting for the purposes of the performance by the Food Standards Agency of its functions under the Food Standards Act 1999 or any other enactment (including functions relating to the investigation of offences), and(b) is authorised (whether generally or specifically) by the Secretary of State for the purposes of this section.(4) The investigations for the purposes of which provisions of this Act may be applied by regulations under this section include investigations of offences committed, or suspected of having been committed, before the coming into force of the regulations or of this section.(5) Regulations under this section are to be made by statutory instrument.(6) Regulations under this section may make—(a) different provision for different purposes;(b) provision which applies generally or for particular purposes;(a) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)	59PART 3A – PhotographsCHAPTER 4 – Other provisions Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have beenmade appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(c) incidental, supplementary, consequential, transitional or transitory provision or savings.(7) A statutory instrument containing regulations under this section is subject to annulment in pursuance of a resolution of either House of Parliament.(8) In this section “enactment” includes—(a) an enactment comprised in subordinate legislation within the meaning of the Interpretation Act 1978, and(b) an enactment comprised in, or in an instrument made under, a Measure or Act of Senedd Cymru.”(2) In the Criminal Justice and Public Order Act 1994, after section 39 insert—“39A Power to apply sections 36 and 37 in relation to food crime officers(1) The Secretary of State may by regulations provide for any provision of section 36 or 37 that applies in relation to a constable to apply in relation to a food crime officer.(2) Regulations under subsection (1) may apply any provision of section 36 or 37 with any modifications specified in the regulations.(3) Regulations under subsection (1) may not apply a provision of section 36 or 37 in relation to a failure or refusal which occurred before the regulations come into force.(4) Regulations under subsection (1) are to be made by statutory instrument.(5) Regulations under subsection (1) may make—(a) different provision for different purposes;(b) provision which applies generally or for particular purposes;(c) incidental, supplementary, consequential, transitional or transitory provision or savings.(6) A statutory instrument containing regulations under subsection (1) is subject to annulment in pursuance of a resolution of either House of Parliament.(7) In this section “food crime officer” has the meaning given by section 114C of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 (PACE powers for food crime officers).”(3) In the Food Standards Act 1999, after section 25 insert—“25A Obstruction of food crime officers(1) A person commits an offence if the person—(a) intentionally obstructs a food crime officer who is acting in the exercise of functions conferred on the officer by virtue of section 114C of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 (PACE powers for food crime officers),(b) fails without reasonable excuse to comply with any requirement made of the person by such a food crime officer who is so acting, or(a) 
60	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 3A – Photographs CHAPTER 4 – Other provisions Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(c) in purported compliance with such a requirement provides information which the person knows to be false or misleading in any material particular or recklessly provides information which is false or misleading in any material particular.(2) A person guilty of an offence under this section is liable on summary conviction to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 3 months or to a fine, or to both.(3) In this section “food crime officer” has the meaning given by section 114C of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 (PACE powers for food crime officers).”(4) In the Police Reform Act 2002—(a) in section 10 (general functions of the Director General)—(i) in subsection (1), at the end of paragraph (ga) insert “; and(gb) to carry out such corresponding functions in relation to officers of the Food Standards Agency acting in the exercise of functions conferred on them by virtue of—(i) section 114C of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 (PACE powers for food crime officers), or(ii) section 39A of the Criminal Justice and Public Order Act 1994 (powers for food crime officers: inferences from silence).”, and(ii) in subsection (3), after paragraph (bd) insert—“(be) any regulations under section 26E of this Act (food crime officers);”, and(b) after section 26D insert—“26E Food crime officers(1) The Secretary of State may make regulations conferring functions on the Director General in relation to officers of the Food Standards Agency (the “Agency”) acting in the exercise of functions conferred on them by virtue of—(a) section 114C of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 (PACE powers for food crime officers), or(b) section 39A of the Criminal Justice and Public Order Act 1994 (powers for food crime officers: inferences from silence).(2) Regulations under this section may, in particular—(a) apply (with or without modifications), or make provision similar to, any provision of or made under this Part;(b) make provision for payment by the Agency to, or in respect of, the Office or in respect of the Director General.(3) The Director General and the Parliamentary Commissioner for Administration may jointly investigate a matter in relation to which—(1) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)	61PART 3A – PhotographsCHAPTER 4 – Other provisions Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have beenmade appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(a) the Director General has functions by virtue of this section, and(b) the Parliamentary Commissioner for Administration has functions by virtue of the Parliamentary Commissioner Act 1967.(4) An officer of the Agency may disclose information to the Director General or to a person acting on the Director General’s behalf, for the purposes of the exercise by the Director General or by any person acting on the Director General’s behalf, of an Agency complaints function.(5) The Director General and the Parliamentary Commissioner for Administration may disclose information to each other for the purposes of the exercise of a function—(a) by virtue of this section, or(b) under the Parliamentary Commissioner Act 1967.(6) Regulations under this section may, in particular, make—(a) further provision about the disclosure of information under subsection (4) or (5);(b) provision about the further disclosure of information that has been so disclosed.(7) A disclosure of information authorised by this section does not breach—(a) any obligation of confidence owed by the person making the disclosure, or(b) any other restriction on the disclosure of information (however imposed).(8) But this section does not authorise a disclosure of information that—(a) would contravene the data protection legislation (but in determining whether a disclosure would do so, the power conferred by this section is to be taken into account), or(b) is prohibited by any of Parts 1 to 7 or Chapter 1 of Part 9 of the Investigatory Powers Act 2016.(9) In this section—“Agency complaints function” means a function in relation to the exercise of functions by officers of the Agency;“data protection legislation” has the same meaning as in the Data Protection Act 2018 (see section 3 of that Act).”(5) The amendments made by subsections (1) to (3) and any regulations made under provision inserted by subsections (1) and (2) bind the Crown.(6) No contravention by the Crown of section 25A of the Food Standards Act 1999 (as inserted by subsection (3)) makes the Crown criminally liable; but the High Court may declare unlawful any act or omission of the Crown which constitutes such a contravention.(7) That section applies to persons in the public service of the Crown as it applies to other persons.(1) 
62	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 3A – Photographs CHAPTER 4 – Other provisions Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(8) If the Secretary of State certifies that it appears requisite or expedient in the interests of national security that any powers of entry conferred by regulations made under provision inserted by subsection (1) should not be exercisable in relation to any Crown premises specified in the certificate, those powers shall not be exercisable in relation to those premises.(9) In this section “Crown premises” means premises held or used by or on behalf of the Crown.(10) Nothing in this section affects Her Majesty in her private capacity; and this subsection is to be interpreted as if section 38(3) of the Crown Proceedings Act 1947 (references to Her Majesty in her private capacity) were contained in this Act.Search for material relating to human remains55 Entry and search of premises for human remains or material relating to human remains(1) On an application made by a constable, a justice of the peace may issue a warrant authorising a constable to enter and search premises if the justice of the peace is satisfied that the following conditions are met.(2) The first condition is that there are reasonable grounds for believing that there is material on the premises mentioned in subsection (5) that consists of, or may relate to the location of, relevant human remains.(3) The second condition is that there are reasonable grounds for believing that the material does not consist of or include—(a) items subject to legal privilege,(b) excluded material, or(c) special procedure material.(4) The third condition is that there are reasonable grounds for believing, in relation to each set of premises specified in the application—(a) that it is not practicable to communicate with any person entitled to grant entry to the premises,(b) that it is practicable to communicate with a person entitled to grant entry to the premises but it is not practicable to communicate with any person entitled to grant access to the material,(c) that entry to the premises will not be granted unless a warrant is produced, or(d) that the purpose of a search may be frustrated or seriously prejudiced unless a constable arriving at the premises can secure immediate entry to them.(5) The premises referred to in subsection (2) are—(a) one or more sets of premises specified in the application (in which case the application is for a “specific premises warrant”), or(a) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)	63PART 3A – PhotographsCHAPTER 4 – Other provisions Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have beenmade appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(b) any premises occupied or controlled by a person specified in the application, including such sets of premises as are so specified (in which case the application is for an “all premises warrant”).(6) If the application is for an all premises warrant, the justice of the peace must also be satisfied—(a) that there are reasonable grounds for believing that it is necessary to search premises occupied or controlled by the person in question which are not specified in the application in order to find the material referred to in subsection (2), and(b) that it is not reasonably practicable to specify in the application all the premises which the person occupies or controls and which might need to be searched.(7) The warrant may authorise entry to and search of premises on more than one occasion if, on the application, the justice of the peace is satisfied that it is necessary to authorise multiple entries in order to achieve the purpose for which the justice of the peace issues the warrant.(8) If the warrant authorises multiple entries, the number of entries authorised may be unlimited, or limited to a maximum.(9) A constable may—(a) seize and retain anything for which a search has been authorised under subsection (1), and(b) if necessary, use reasonable force in the exercise of a power conferred by a warrant issued under this section.(10) The power to issue a warrant conferred by this section is in addition to any such power otherwise conferred.(11) In this section, section 56 and Schedule 6 “relevant human remains” means the body or any other human remains of—(a) a person who the constable making the application reasonably believes to have died in England and Wales but whose death has not been registered under section 15 of the Births and Deaths Registration Act 1953,(b) a person whose death has been registered under that Act following an investigation under section 1(5) of the Coroners and Justice Act 2009, or(c) a person in respect of whom a declaration has been made under section 2 of the Presumption of Death Act 2013.(12) In this section, section 56 and Schedule 6 the following expressions have the same meaning as in the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984—(a) “items subject to legal privilege” (see section 10 of that Act);(b) “excluded material” (see section 11 of that Act);(c) “special procedure material” (see section 14 of that Act);(d) “premises” (see section 23 of that Act).
64	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 3A – Photographs CHAPTER 4 – Other provisions Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes56 Special procedure for access to material relating to human remains(1) Schedule 6 makes provision for a constable to obtain access to excluded material or special procedure material that consists of, or relates to the location of, relevant human remains.(2) Section 4 of the Summary Jurisdiction (Process) Act 1881 (which includes provision for the execution of process of English and Welsh courts in Scotland) and section 29 of the Petty Sessions (Ireland) Act 1851 (which makes equivalent provision for execution in Northern Ireland) apply to any process issued by a judge under Schedule 6 to this Act as they apply to process issued by a magistrates’ court under the Magistrates’ Courts Act 1980.57 Additional seizure powersIn Part 1 of Schedule 1 to the Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (powers of seizure to which section 50 of that Act applies), at the end insert—“Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 202273U	Each of the powers of seizure conferred by section 55(9)(a) of, and paragraph 11(a) of Schedule 6 to, the Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (seizure in connection with human remains or material relating to human remains).”Prisoner custody officers58 Functions of prisoner custody officers in relation to live link hearings(1) The Criminal Justice Act 1991 is amended as follows.(2) Section 80 (arrangements for the provision of prisoner escorts) is amended in accordance with subsections (3) to (5).(3) In subsection (1), after paragraph (b) insert—“(ba) the custody of prisoners at a police station for any purpose connected with their participation in a preliminary, sentencing or enforcement hearing through a live audio link or live video link;”.(4) After subsection (1A) insert—(1) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)	65PART 3A – PhotographsCHAPTER 4 – Other provisions Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have beenmade appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes“(1B) Subsection (1)(ba) applies in relation to prisoners whether the hearing is yet to take place, is taking place or has taken place.”(5) In subsection (4), at the appropriate place insert—  ““enforcement hearing”, “live audio link”, “live video link”, “preliminary hearing” and “sentencing hearing” each has the meaning given in section 56(1) of the Criminal Justice Act 2003;”.(6) Section 82 (powers and duties of prisoner custody officers) is amended in accordance with subsections (7) and (8).(7) After subsection (4) insert—“(4A) Subsections (4B) and (4C) apply if a prisoner custody officer acting in pursuance of prisoner escort arrangements is at a police station for the purposes of exercising functions under section 80(1)(ba) (custody of prisoners in relation to live link proceedings) in relation to a prisoner.(4B) It is the prisoner custody officer’s duty to give effect to—(a) any order of the Crown Court under section 142 of the Powers of Criminal Courts (Sentencing) Act 2000 in relation to the prisoner, or(b) any order of a magistrates’ court under section 80 of the 1980 Act in relation to the prisoner.(4C) The fact that the prisoner custody officer is exercising, or may exercise, functions under section 80(1)(ba) in relation to the prisoner does not prevent a constable from exercising any powers in relation to the prisoner that are otherwise available to the constable.”(8) In subsection (5) for “and (4)” substitute “, (4) and (4B)”.Proceeds of crime59 Proceeds of crime: account freezing orders(1) In section 303Z1 of the Proceeds of Crime Act 2002 (application for account freezing order)—(a) omit subsections (5A) and (5B), and(b) in subsection (6), at the appropriate place insert— ““relevant financial institution” means—(a) a bank,(b) a building society,(c) an electronic money institution, or(d) a payment institution.”(2) In section 316(1) of that Act (general interpretation), in the definition of “relevant financial institution”, after “303Z1” insert “(6)”.(1) 
66	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 3A – Photographs CHAPTER 4 – Other provisions Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(3) In section 48 of the Financial Services Act 2021 (extent)—(a) in subsection (1), for “subsections (2) and (3)” substitute “subsection (2)”, and(b) omit subsection (3).(4) In paragraph 14 of Schedule 12 to that Act (forfeiture of money: electronic money institutions and payment institutions) omit sub-paragraphs (3) and (4).Non-criminal hate incidents60 Code of practice relating to non-criminal hate incidents(1) The Secretary of State may issue a code of practice about the processing by a relevant person of personal data relating to a hate incident.(2) In this section “hate incident” means an incident or alleged incident which involves or is alleged to involve an act by a person (“the alleged perpetrator”) which is perceived by a person other than the alleged perpetrator to be motivated (wholly or partly) by hostility or prejudice towards persons with a particular characteristic.(3) The provision that may be made by a code of practice under this section includes, in particular, provision about—(a) whether and how personal data relating to a hate incident should be recorded;(b) the persons who are to process such personal data;(c) the circumstances in which a data subject should be notified of the processing of such personal data;(d) the retention of such personal data, including the period for which it should be retained and the circumstances in which and the procedures by which that period might be changed;(e) the consideration by a relevant person of requests by the data subject relating to such personal data.(4) But a code of practice under this section must not make provision about—(a) the processing of personal data for the purposes of a criminal investigation, or(b) the processing of personal data relating to the alleged perpetrator of a hate incident at any time after they have been charged with an offence relating to the hate incident.(5) A code of practice under this section may make different provision for different purposes.(6) A relevant person must have regard to the code of practice that is for the time being in force under this section in processing personal data relating to a hate incident.(7) In this section—  “data subject” has the meaning given by section 3(5) of the Data Protection Act 2018;“personal data” has the meaning given by section 3(2) of that Act;
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)	67PART 3A – PhotographsCHAPTER 4 – Other provisions Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have beenmade appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes“processing” has the meaning given by section 3(4) of that Act.(8) In this section “relevant person” means—(a) a member of a police force in England and Wales,(b) a special constable appointed under section 27 of the Police Act 1996,(c) a member of staff appointed by the chief officer of police of a police force in England and Wales,(d) a person designated as a community support volunteer or a policing support volunteer under section 38 of the Police Reform Act 2002,(e) an employee of the Common Council of the City of London who is under the direction and control of a chief officer of police,(f) a constable of the British Transport Police Force,(g) a special constable of the British Transport Police Force appointed under section 25 of the Railways and Transport Safety Act 2003,(h) an employee of the British Transport Police Authority appointed under section 27 of that Act,(i) a person designated as a community support volunteer or a policing support volunteer under section 38 of the Police Reform Act 2002 as applied by section 28 of the Railways and Transport Safety Act 2003, or(j) a National Crime Agency officer.61 Further provision about a code of practice under section 60(1) The Secretary of State may not issue a code of practice under section 60 unless a draft of the code has been laid before and approved by a resolution of each House of Parliament.(2) The Secretary of State may from time to time revise and reissue a code of practice under section 60.(3) Before reissuing a code of practice the Secretary of State must lay a draft of the code as proposed to be reissued before Parliament.(4) If, within the 40-day period, either House of Parliament resolves not to approve the code of practice laid under subsection (3)—(a) the code is not to be reissued, and(b) the Secretary of State may prepare another code.(5) If no such resolution is passed within the 40-day period, the Secretary of State may reissue the code of practice.(6) In this section “the 40-day period” means—(a) the period of 40 days beginning with the day on which the draft is laid before Parliament, or(b) if the draft is not laid before each House on the same day, the period of 40 days beginning with the later of the days on which it is laid before Parliament.(a) 
68	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 3A – Photographs CHAPTER 4 – Other provisions Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(7) In calculating the 40-day period no account is to be taken of any period during which Parliament is dissolved or prorogued or during which both Houses of Parliament are adjourned for more than 4 days.Offences relating to hares etc62 Increase in penalty for offences related to game etc(1) Section 1 of the Night Poaching Act 1828 (taking or destroying game or rabbits by night or entering land for that purpose) is amended in accordance with subsections (2) to (4).(2) The existing text becomes subsection (1).(3) In that subsection—(a) after “conviction” insert “to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 51 weeks,”, and(b) for “not exceeding level 3 on the standard scale” substitute “or to both”.(4) After that subsection insert—“(2) In relation to an offence committed before the coming into force of section 281(5) of the Criminal Justice Act 2003 (alteration of penalties for certain summary offences: England and Wales), the reference in subsection (1) to 51 weeks is to be read as a reference to 6 months.”(5) Section 30 of the Game Act 1831 (trespass in daytime in search of game etc) is amended in accordance with subsections (6) to (8).(6) The existing text becomes subsection (1).(7) In that subsection—(a) for the words from “conviction”, in the first place it occurs, to “seem meet”, in the second place it occurs, substitute “summary conviction, be liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 51 weeks, to a fine or to both”, and(b) for “each of the two offences” substitute “the offence”.(8) After that subsection insert—“(2) In relation to an offence committed before the coming into force of section 281(5) of the Criminal Justice Act 2003 (alteration of penalties for certain summary offences: England and Wales), the reference in subsection (1) to 51 weeks is to be read as a reference to 6 months.”(9) In section 4A of the Game Laws (Amendment) Act 1960 (forfeiture of vehicles), in subsection (1), omit “as one of five or more persons liable under that section”.(10) The amendments made by this section have effect only in relation to offences committed on or after the day on which this section comes into force.(1) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)	69PART 3A – PhotographsCHAPTER 4 – Other provisions Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have beenmade appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes63 Trespass with intent to search for or to pursue hares with dogs etc(1) A person commits an offence if they trespass on land with the intention of—(a) using a dog to search for or to pursue a hare,(b) facilitating or encouraging the use of a dog to search for or to pursue a hare, or(c) enabling another person to observe the use of a dog to search for or to pursue a hare.(2) It is a defence for a person charged with an offence under subsection (1) to prove that they had a reasonable excuse for the trespass mentioned in that subsection.(3) A person guilty of an offence under subsection (1) is liable on summary conviction to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 51 weeks, to a fine or to both.(4) In relation to an offence committed before the coming into force of section 281(5) of the Criminal Justice Act 2003 (alteration of penalties for certain summary offences: England and Wales), the reference in subsection (3) to 51 weeks is to be read as a reference to 6 months.64 Being equipped for searching for or pursuing hares with dogs etc(1) A person commits an offence if they have an article with them in a place other than a dwelling with the intention that it will be used in the course of or in connection with the commission by any person of an offence under section 63 (trespass with intent to search for or to pursue hares with dogs etc).(2) Where a person is charged with an offence under subsection (1), proof that the person had with them any article made or adapted for use in committing an offence under section 63 is evidence that the person had it with them with the intention that it would be used in the course of or in connection with the commission by any person of an offence under that section.(3) A person guilty of an offence under subsection (1) is liable on summary conviction to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 51 weeks, to a fine or to both.(4) In relation to an offence committed before the coming into force of section 281(5) of the Criminal Justice Act 2003 (alteration of penalties for certain summary offences: England and Wales), the reference in subsection (3) to 51 weeks is to be read as a reference to 6 months.(5) In this section—“article” includes a vehicle and, except in subsection (2), an animal;
70	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 3A – Photographs CHAPTER 4 – Other provisions Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes“dwelling” means—(a) a building or structure which is used as a dwelling, or(b) a part of a building or structure, if the part is used as a dwelling,and includes any yard, garden, garage or outhouse belonging to and used with a dwelling.65 Recovery order on conviction for certain offences involving dogs(1) This section applies where—(a) a person is convicted of an offence within subsection (5) which was committed on or after the day on which this section comes into force,(b) a dog was used in or was present at the commission of the offence, and(c) the dog was lawfully seized and detained in connection with the offence.(2) The court may make an order (a “recovery order”) requiring the offender to pay all the expenses incurred by reason of the dog’s seizure and detention.(3) Any sum required to be paid under subsection (2) is to be treated for the purposes of enforcement as if it were a fine imposed on conviction.(4) Where a recovery order is available for an offence, the court may make such an order whether or not it deals with the offender in any other way for the offence.(5) The following offences are within this subsection—(a) an offence under section 1 of the Night Poaching Act 1828 (taking or destroying game or rabbits by night or entering land for that purpose);(b) an offence under section 30 of the Game Act 1831 (trespass in daytime in search of game etc);(c) an offence under section 63 (trespass with intent to search for or to pursue hares with dogs etc);(d) an offence under section 64 (being equipped for searching for or pursuing hares with dogs etc).66 Disqualification order on conviction for certain offences involving dogs(1) This section applies where—(a) a person is convicted of an offence within subsection (9) which was committed on or after the day on which this section comes into force, and(b) a dog was used in or was present at the commission of the offence.(a) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)	71PART 3A – PhotographsCHAPTER 4 – Other provisions Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have beenmade appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(2) The court may make an order (a “disqualification order”) disqualifying the offender, for such period as the court thinks fit, from—(a) owning dogs,(b) keeping dogs, or(c) both.(3) The disqualification order may specify a period during which the offender may not make an application under section 68 to terminate the order.(4) The court may, where it appears to the court that the offender owns or keeps a dog, suspend the operation of the disqualification order for such period as it thinks necessary for enabling alternative arrangements to be made in respect of the dog.(5) Where a court makes a disqualification order, it must—(a) give its reasons for making the order in open court, and(b) cause them to be entered in the register of its proceedings.(6) A person who breaches a disqualification order commits an offence.(7) A person guilty of an offence under subsection (6) is liable on summary conviction to a fine not exceeding level 3 on the standard scale.(8) Where a disqualification order is available for an offence, the court may make such an order whether or not it deals with the offender in any other way for the offence.(9) The following offences are within this subsection—(a) an offence under section 1 of the Night Poaching Act 1828 (taking or destroying game or rabbits by night or entering land for that purpose);(b) an offence under section 30 of the Game Act 1831 (trespass in daytime in search of game etc);(c) an offence under section 63 (trespass with intent to search for or to pursue hares with dogs etc);(d) an offence under section 64 (being equipped for searching for or pursuing hares with dogs etc).(10) In section 171 of the Sentencing Code (offences relating to animals), after subsection (2) insert—“(3) See section 66 of the Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (disqualification order on conviction for certain offences involving dogs) for orders relating to disqualification in the case of offences involving dogs under that Act, the Night Poaching Act 1828 and the Game Act 1831.”67 Seizure and disposal of dogs in connection with disqualification order(1) Where, on a court making a disqualification order, it appears to the court that the person to whom the order applies owns or keeps a dog contrary to the order, the court may order that the dog be taken into possession.(1) 
72	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 3A – Photographs CHAPTER 4 – Other provisions Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(2) Where a person is convicted of an offence under section 66(6) by reason of owning or keeping a dog in breach of a disqualification order, the court by which the person is convicted may order that all dogs owned or kept in breach of the order be taken into possession.(3) An order under subsection (1) or (2), so far as relating to any dog owned by the person to whom the disqualification order applies, must make provision for disposal of the dog.(4) Any dog taken into possession in pursuance of an order under subsection (1) or (2) that is not owned by the person subject to the disqualification order is to be dealt with in such manner as an appropriate court may order.(5) But an order under subsection (4) may not provide for the dog to be—(a) destroyed, or(b) disposed of for the purposes of vivisection.(6) A court may not make an order for disposal of the dog under subsection (4) unless—(a) it has given the owner of the dog an opportunity to be heard, or(b) it is satisfied that it is not reasonably practicable to communicate with the owner.(7) Where a court makes an order under subsection (4) for the disposal of the dog, the owner of the dog may appeal against the order to the Crown Court.(8) In this section—“appropriate court” means—(a) the magistrates’ court which made the order under subsection (1) or (2), or(b) another magistrates’ court acting for the same local justice area as that court;“disqualification order” has the same meaning as in section 66.(9) In this section references to disposing of a dog do not include—(a) destroying it, or(b) disposing of it for the purposes of vivisection.68 Termination of disqualification order(1) A person who is subject to a disqualification order may apply to an appropriate court for the order to be terminated.(2) No application under subsection (1) may be made—(a) before the end of the period of one year beginning with the date on which the disqualification order was made,(a) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)	73PART 3A – PhotographsCHAPTER 4 – Other provisions Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have beenmade appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(b) where a previous application under that subsection has been made in relation to the same order, before the end of the period of one year beginning with the date on which the previous application was determined, or(c) before the end of any period specified under section 66(3), or subsection (5), in relation to the order.(3) On an application under subsection (1), the court may—(a) terminate the disqualification order,(b) vary the order so as to make it less onerous, or(c) refuse the application.(4) When determining an application under subsection (1), the court is to have regard to—(a) the character of the applicant,(b) the applicant’s conduct since the disqualification order was made, and(c) any other relevant circumstances.(5) Where the court refuses an application under subsection (1) or varies a disqualification order on such an application, it may specify a period during which the applicant may not make a further application under that subsection in relation to the order concerned.(6) The court may order an applicant to pay all or part of the costs of an application.(7) In this section—“appropriate court” means—(a) the magistrates’ court which made the disqualification order, or(b) another magistrates’ court acting for the same local justice area as that court;“disqualification order” has the same meaning as in section 66.69 Section 67: supplementary(1) The court by which an order under section 67 is made may—(a) appoint a person to carry out, or arrange for the carrying out of, the order;(b) require any person who has possession of a dog to which the order applies to deliver it up to enable the order to be carried out;(c) give directions with respect to the carrying out of the order;(d) confer additional powers (including power to enter premises where a dog to which the order applies is being kept) for the purpose of, or in connection with, the carrying out of the order;(e) order the person who committed the offence in relation to which the order was made, or another person, to reimburse the expenses of carrying out the order.(2) A person who fails to comply with a requirement imposed under subsection (1)(b) commits an offence.(1) 
74	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 3A – Photographs CHAPTER 4 – Other provisions Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(3) A person guilty of an offence under subsection (2) is liable on summary conviction to a fine not exceeding level 3 on the standard scale.(4) Directions under subsection (1)(c) may—(a) specify the manner in which a dog is to be disposed of, or(b) delegate the decision about the manner in which a dog is to be disposed of to a person appointed under subsection (1)(a).(5) In determining how to exercise its powers under section 67 and this section the court is to have regard (amongst other things) to—(a) the desirability of protecting the value of any dog to which the order under section 67 applies, and(b) the desirability of avoiding increasing any expenses which a person may be ordered to reimburse.(6) In determining how to exercise a power delegated under subsection (4)(b), a person is to have regard, amongst other things, to the things mentioned in subsection (5)(a) and (b).(7) If the owner of a dog ordered to be disposed of under section 67 is subject to a liability by virtue of subsection (1)(e), any amount to which the owner is entitled as a result of sale of the dog may be reduced by an amount equal to that liability.(8) Any sum ordered to be paid under subsection (1)(e) is to be treated for the purposes of enforcement as if it were a fine imposed on conviction.(9) In this section references to disposing of a dog do not include—(a) destroying it, or(b) disposing of it for the purposes of vivisection.70 Disqualification orders: appeals(1) Nothing may be done under an order under section 66 or 67 with respect to a dog unless—(a) the period for giving notice of appeal against the order has expired,(b) the period for giving notice of appeal against the conviction on which the order was made has expired, and(c) if the order or conviction is the subject of an appeal, the appeal has been determined or withdrawn.(2) Where the effect of an order is suspended under subsection (1)—(a) no requirement imposed or directions given in connection with the order have effect, but(b) the court may give directions about how any dog to which the order applies is to be dealt with during the suspension.(3) Directions under subsection (2)(b) may, in particular—(1) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)	75PART 3A – PhotographsCHAPTER 4 – Other provisions Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have beenmade appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(a) authorise the dog to be taken into possession;(b) authorise the dog to be cared for either on the premises where it was being kept when it was taken into possession or at some other place;(c) appoint a person to carry out, or arrange for the carrying out of, the directions;(d) require any person who has possession of the dog to deliver it up for the purposes of the directions;(e) confer additional powers (including power to enter premises where the dog is being kept) for the purpose of, or in connection with, the carrying out of the directions;(f) provide for the recovery of any expenses in relation to the removal or care of the dog which are incurred in carrying out the directions.(4) A person who fails to comply with a requirement imposed under subsection (3)(d) commits an offence.(5) A person guilty an offence under subsection (4) is liable on summary conviction to a fine not exceeding level 3 on the standard scale.(6) Any sum directed to be paid under subsection (3)(f) is to be treated for the purposes of enforcement as if it were a fine imposed on conviction.Administering a substance with intent to cause harm71 Administering a substance with intent to cause harm(1) The Secretary of State must, before the end of the relevant period—(a) prepare and publish a report—(i) about the nature and prevalence of the conduct described in subsection (2), and(ii) setting out any steps Her Majesty’s Government has taken or intends to take in relation to the matters referred to in sub-paragraph (i), and(b) lay the report before Parliament.(2) The conduct referred to in subsection (1)(a)(i) is a person intentionally administering a substance to, or causing a substance to be taken by, another person—(a) without the consent of that other person, and(b) with the intention of causing harm (whether or not amounting to an offence) to that other person.(3) In subsection (1), the “relevant period” means the period of 12 months beginning with the day on which this Act is passed.
76	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 3 – Public order CHAPTER 4 – Other provisions Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesOffences motivated by hostility based on sex or gender72 Response to Law Commission report on hate crime laws(1) The Secretary of State must, before the end of the period of 12 months beginning with the day on which this Act is passed—(a) prepare and publish a response to Recommendation 8 of the Law Commission report on hate crime (adding sex or gender as a protected characteristic for the purposes of aggravated offences and enhanced sentencing), and(b) lay the response before Parliament.(2) In this section “the Law Commission report on hate crime” means the Law Commission report “Hate Crime Laws” that was published on 7 December 2021.PART 3PUBLIC ORDERPublic processions and public assemblies73 Imposing conditions on public processions(1) Section 12 of the Public Order Act 1986 (imposing conditions on public processions) is amended as follows.(2) In subsection (1)—(a) for the “or” at the end of paragraph (a) substitute—“(aa) in the case of a procession in England and Wales, the noise generated by persons taking part in the procession may result in serious disruption to the activities of an organisation which are carried on in the vicinity of the procession,(ab)  in the case of a procession in England and Wales—(i) the noise generated by persons taking part in the procession may have a relevant impact on persons in the vicinity of the procession, and(ii) that impact may be significant, or”, and(b) in the words following paragraph (b), after “disruption” insert “, impact”.(3) After subsection (2) insert—“(2A) For the purposes of subsection (1)(a), the cases in which a public procession in England and Wales may result in serious disruption to the life of the community include, in particular, where—(a) it may result in a significant delay to the delivery of a time-sensitive product to consumers of that product, or(a) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)	77PART 3 – Public orderCHAPTER 4 – Other provisions Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have beenmade appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(b) it may result in a prolonged disruption of access to any essential goods or any essential service, including, in particular, access to—(i) the supply of money, food, water, energy or fuel,(ii) a system of communication,(iii) a place of worship,(iv) a transport facility,(v) an educational institution, or(vi) a service relating to health.(2B) In subsection (2A)(a) “time-sensitive product” means a product whose value or use to its consumers may be significantly reduced by a delay in the supply of the product to them.(2C) For the purposes of subsection (1)(aa), the cases in which the noise generated by persons taking part in a public procession may result in serious disruption to the activities of an organisation which are carried on in the vicinity of the procession include, in particular, where it may result in persons connected with the organisation not being reasonably able, for a prolonged period of time, to carry on in that vicinity the activities or any one of them.(2D) For the purposes of subsection (1)(ab)(i), the noise generated by persons taking part in a public procession may have a relevant impact on persons in the vicinity of the procession if—(a) it may result in the intimidation or harassment of persons of reasonable firmness with the characteristics of persons likely to be in the vicinity, or(b) it may cause such persons to suffer alarm or distress.(2E) In considering for the purposes of subsection (1)(ab)(ii) whether the noise generated by persons taking part in a public procession may have a significant impact on persons in the vicinity of the procession, the senior police officer must have regard to—(a) the likely number of persons of the kind mentioned in paragraph (a) of subsection (2D) who may experience an impact of the kind mentioned in paragraph (a) or (b) of that subsection,(b) the likely duration of that impact on such persons, and(c) the likely intensity of that impact on such persons.”(4) After subsection (11) insert—“(12) The Secretary of State may by regulations amend any of subsections (2A) to (2C) for the purposes of making provision about the meaning for the purposes of this section of—(a) serious disruption to the activities of an organisation which are carried on in the vicinity of a public procession, or(b) serious disruption to the life of the community.(13) Regulations under subsection (12) may, in particular, amend any of those subsections for the purposes of—(a) defining any aspect of an expression mentioned in subsection (12)(a) or (b) for the purposes of this section;(a) 
78	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 3 – Public order CHAPTER 4 – Other provisions Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(b) giving examples of cases in which a public procession is or is not to be treated as resulting in—(i) serious disruption to the activities of an organisation which are carried on in the vicinity of the procession, or(ii) serious disruption to the life of the community.(14) Regulations under subsection (12)—(a) are to be made by statutory instrument;(b) may apply only in relation to public processions in England and Wales;(c) may make incidental, supplementary, consequential, transitional, transitory or saving provision, including provision which makes consequential amendments to this Part.(15) A statutory instrument containing regulations under subsection (12) may not be made unless a draft of the instrument has been laid before and approved by a resolution of each House of Parliament.”(5) The Secretary of State must, before the end of the period of 2 years beginning with the day on which this section comes into force—(a) prepare and publish a report on the operation of the amendments to section 12 of the Public Order Act 1986 made by this section, and(b) lay the report before Parliament.74 Imposing conditions on public assemblies(1) Section 14 of the Public Order Act 1986 (imposing conditions on public assemblies) is amended as follows.(2) In subsection (1)—(a) for “If” substitute “Subsection (1A) applies if”,(b) for the “or” at the end of paragraph (a) substitute—“(aa) in the case of an assembly in England and Wales, the noise generated by persons taking part in the assembly may result in serious disruption to the activities of an organisation which are carried on in the vicinity of the assembly,(ab)  in the case of an assembly in England and Wales—(i) the noise generated by persons taking part in the assembly may have a relevant impact on persons in the vicinity of the assembly, and(ii) that impact may be significant, or”, and(c) omit the words after paragraph (b).(3) After subsection (1) insert—(1) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)	79PART 3 – Public orderCHAPTER 4 – Other provisions Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have beenmade appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes“(1A) The senior police officer may give directions imposing on the persons organising or taking part in the assembly—(a) in the case of an assembly in England and Wales, such conditions as appear to the officer necessary to prevent the disorder, damage, disruption, impact or intimidation mentioned in subsection (1);(b) in the case of an assembly in Scotland, such conditions as to the place at which the assembly may be (or continue to be) held, its maximum duration, or the maximum number of persons who may constitute it, as appear to the officer necessary to prevent the disorder, damage, disruption or intimidation mentioned in subsection (1)(a) or (b).”(4) In subsection (2), for “subsection (1)” substitute “this section”.(5) After subsection (2) insert—“(2A) For the purposes of subsection (1)(a), the cases in which a public assembly in England and Wales may result in serious disruption to the life of the community include, in particular, where—(a) it may result in a significant delay to the supply of a time-sensitive product to consumers of that product, or(b) it may result in a prolonged disruption of access to any essential goods or any essential service, including, in particular, access to—(i) the supply of money, food, water, energy or fuel,(ii) a system of communication,(iii) a place of worship,(iv) a transport facility,(v) an educational institution, or(vi) a service relating to health.(2B) In subsection (2A)(a) “time-sensitive product” means a product whose value or use to its consumers may be significantly reduced by a delay in the supply of the product to them.(2C) For the purposes of subsection (1)(aa), the cases in which the noise generated by persons taking part in a public assembly may result in serious disruption to the activities of an organisation which are carried on in the vicinity of the assembly include, in particular, where it may result in persons connected with the organisation not being reasonably able, for a prolonged period of time, to carry on in that vicinity the activities or any one of them.(2D) For the purposes of subsection (1)(ab)(i), the noise generated by persons taking part in an assembly may have a relevant impact on persons in the vicinity of the assembly if—(a) it may result in the intimidation or harassment of persons of reasonable firmness with the characteristics of persons likely to be in the vicinity, or(b) it may cause such persons to suffer alarm or distress.(2E) In considering for the purposes of subsection (1)(ab)(ii) whether the noise generated by persons taking part in an assembly may have a significant impact on persons in the vicinity of the assembly, the senior police officer must have regard to—
80	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 3 – Public order CHAPTER 4 – Other provisions Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(a) the likely number of persons of the kind mentioned in paragraph (a) of subsection (2D) who may experience an impact of the kind mentioned in paragraph (a) or (b) of that subsection,(b) the likely duration of that impact on such persons, and(c) the likely intensity of that impact on such persons.”(6) After subsection (10A) (as inserted by section 75(11)) insert—“(11) The Secretary of State may by regulations amend any of subsections (2A) to (2C) for the purposes of making provision about the meaning for the purposes of this section of—(a) serious disruption to the activities of an organisation which are carried on in the vicinity of a public assembly, or(b) serious disruption to the life of the community.(12) Regulations under subsection (11) may, in particular, amend any of those subsections for the purposes of—(a) defining any aspect of an expression mentioned in subsection (11)(a) or (b) for the purposes of this section;(b) giving examples of cases in which a public assembly is or is not to be treated as resulting in—(i) serious disruption to the activities of an organisation which are carried on in the vicinity of the assembly, or(ii) serious disruption to the life of the community.(13) Regulations under subsection (11)—(a) are to be made by statutory instrument;(b) may apply only in relation to public assemblies in England and Wales;(c) may make incidental, supplementary, consequential, transitional, transitory or saving provision, including provision which makes consequential amendments to this Part.(14) A statutory instrument containing regulations under subsection (11) may not be made unless a draft of the instrument has been laid before and approved by a resolution of each House of Parliament.”(7) The Secretary of State must, before the end of the period of 2 years beginning with the day on which this section comes into force—(a) prepare and publish a report on the operation of the amendments to section 14 of the Public Order Act 1986 made by this section, and(b) lay the report before Parliament.75 Offences under sections 12 and 14 of the Public Order Act 1986(1) The Public Order Act 1986 is amended as follows.(1) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)	81PART 3 – Public orderCHAPTER 4 – Other provisions Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have beenmade appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(2) Section 12 (imposing conditions on public processions) is amended in accordance with subsections (3) to (6).(3) In subsection (4)—(a) for “A person” substitute “Subject to subsection (5A), a person”, and(b) omit “knowingly”.(4) In subsection (5)—(a) for “A person” substitute “Subject to subsection (5A), a person”, and(b) omit “knowingly”.(5) After subsection (5) insert—“(5A) A person is guilty of an offence under subsection (4) or (5) only if—(a) in the case of a public procession in England and Wales, at the time the person fails to comply with the condition the person knows or ought to know that the condition has been imposed;(b) in the case of a public procession in Scotland, the person knowingly fails to comply with the condition.”(6) For subsections (8) to (10) substitute—“(8) A person guilty of an offence under subsection (4) is liable on summary conviction—(a) in the case of a public procession in England and Wales, to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 51 weeks or a fine not exceeding level 4 on the standard scale or both;(b) in the case of a public procession in Scotland, to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 3 months or a fine not exceeding level 4 on the standard scale or both.(9) A person guilty of an offence under subsection (5) is liable on summary conviction—(a) in the case of a public procession in England and Wales, to a fine not exceeding level 4 on the standard scale;(b) in the case of a public procession in Scotland, to a fine not exceeding level 3 on the standard scale.(10) A person guilty of an offence under subsection (6) is liable on summary conviction—(a) in the case of a public procession in England and Wales, to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 51 weeks or a fine not exceeding level 4 on the standard scale or both;(b) in the case of a public procession in Scotland, to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 3 months or a fine not exceeding level 4 on the(a) 
82	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 3 – Public order CHAPTER 4 – Other provisions Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(7) Section 14 (imposing conditions on public assemblies) is amended in accordance with subsections (8) to (11).(8) In subsection (4)—(a) for “A person” substitute “Subject to subsection (5A), a person”, and(b) omit “knowingly”.(9) In subsection (5)—(a) for “A person” substitute “Subject to subsection (5A), a person”, and(b) omit “knowingly”.(10) After subsection (5) insert—“(5A) A person is guilty of an offence under subsection (4) or (5) only if—(a) in the case of a public assembly in England and Wales, at the time the person fails to comply with the condition the person knows or ought to know that the condition has been imposed;(b) in the case of a public assembly in Scotland, the person knowingly fails to comply with the condition.”(11) For subsections (8) to (10) substitute—“(8) A person guilty of an offence under subsection (4) is liable on summary conviction—(a) in the case of a public assembly in England and Wales, to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 51 weeks or a fine not exceeding level 4 on the standard scale or both;(b) in the case of a public assembly in Scotland, to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 3 months or a fine not exceeding level 4 on the standard scale or both.(9) A person guilty of an offence under subsection (5) is liable on summary conviction—(a) in the case of a public assembly in England and Wales, to a fine not exceeding level 4 on the standard scale;(b) in the case of a public assembly in Scotland, to a fine not exceeding level 3 on the standard scale.(10) A person guilty of an offence under subsection (6) is liable on summary conviction—(a) in the case of a public assembly in England and Wales, to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 51 weeks or a fine not exceeding level 4 on the standard scale or both;(b) in the case of a public assembly in Scotland, to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 3 months or a fine not exceeding level 4 on the(a) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)	83PART 3 – Public orderCHAPTER 4 – Other provisions Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have beenmade appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(12) Subsections (6) and (11) apply only in relation to offences committed on or after the day on which this section comes into force.Palace of Westminster, Parliament Square etc76 Obstruction of vehicular access to Parliament(1) Part 3 of the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (Parliament Square etc) is amended as follows.(2) In section 142A (other controlled areas in vicinity of the Palace of Westminster)—(a) in subsection (1)—(i) in paragraph (a), after sub-paragraph (i) insert—“(ia) Canon Row,(ib) Parliament Street, (ic) Derby Gate,(id) Parliament Square,”, and(ii) after paragraph (a) insert—“(aa) so much of the highway in the postal district SW1 known as Victoria Embankment as lies between the highway in that district known as Bridge Street and the highway in that district known as Richmond Terrace,”, and(b) after subsection (1) insert—“(1A) A reference to a highway in subsection (1)(a) or (aa) includes any land immediately adjoining that highway and to which the public have or are permitted access.”(3) In section 143 (prohibited activities in controlled area of Parliament Square or in Palace of Westminster controlled area)—(a) in subsection (2), after paragraph (e) insert—“(f) obstructing, by the use of any item or otherwise, the passage of a vehicle of any description into or out of an entrance into or exit from the Parliamentary Estate, where that entrance or exit is within, or adjoins, the Palace of Westminster controlled area.”,(b) in subsection (3)(b) for “relevant authority” substitute “relevant person”,(c) after subsection (4) insert—“(4A) In subsection (2)(f) the reference to obstructing the passage of a vehicle includes making the passage of a vehicle more difficult.”,(d) in subsection (5)—(a) 
84	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 3 – Public order CHAPTER 4 – Other provisions Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(i) in the words before paragraph (a), for ““relevant authority”” substitute ““relevant person””,(ii) omit “or” at the end of paragraph (b), and(iii) after paragraph (c) insert—“(d)	a relevant member of the House of Lords staff, or(e) a relevant member of the House of Commons staff”, and(e)	after subsection (5) insert—“(5A) In subsection (5)—“relevant member of the House of Lords staff” has the meaning given by section 194(6) of the Employment Rights Act 1996; “relevant member of the House of Commons staff” has themeaning given by section 195(5) of that Act.”(4) Subsection (2) does not affect—(a) any direction given under section 143(1) of the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 before the day on which this section came into force,(b) any order made under section 146(1)(b) of that Act before that day, or(c) any authorisation given under section 147 of that Act before that day.(5) Any such direction, order or authorisation applies in relation to the Palace of Westminster controlled area as defined by section 142A(1) of that Act as it had effect immediately before that day.77 Power to specify other areas as controlled areasAfter section 149 of the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 insert—“149A Power to specify other areas as controlled areas(1) The Secretary of State may by regulations provide for any provision of sections 143 to 148 and 149(3) to apply, with or without modifications, in relation to an area specified in the regulations.(2) An area may be specified in regulations under subsection (1) by description, by reference to a map or plan or in any other way.(3) Regulations under subsection (1) may be made only if—(a) either House of Parliament is, or is proposed to be, located somewhere other than the Palace of Westminster as a result of the Parliamentary building works or for any other reason, and(b) as a result of that relocation, or proposed relocation, the Secretary of State considers that it is reasonably necessary for activities which are prohibited in relation to the controlled area of Parliament Square or the(a) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)	85PART 3 – Public orderCHAPTER 4 – Other provisions Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have beenmade appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesPalace of Westminster controlled area to be prohibited in relation to the area specified in the regulations.(4) In subsection (3)(a) “the Parliamentary building works” has the meaning given by section 1(1) of the Parliamentary Buildings (Restoration and Renewal) Act 2019.(5) The Secretary of State may by regulations make provision for any other enactment, or any instrument made under an enactment, to have effect with modifications in consequence of regulations under subsection (1).”Public nuisance78 Intentionally or recklessly causing public nuisance(1) A person commits an offence if—(a) the person—(i) does an act, or(ii) omits to do an act that they are required to do by any enactment or rule of law,(b) the person’s act or omission—(i) creates a risk of, or causes, serious harm to the public or a section of the public, or(ii) obstructs the public or a section of the public in the exercise or enjoyment of a right that may be exercised or enjoyed by the public at large, and(c) the person intends that their act or omission will have a consequence mentioned in paragraph (b) or is reckless as to whether it will have such a consequence.(2) In subsection (1)(b)(i) “serious harm” means—(a) death, personal injury or disease,(b) loss of, or damage to, property, or(c) serious distress, serious annoyance, serious inconvenience or serious loss of amenity.(3) It is a defence for a person charged with an offence under subsection (1) to prove that they had a reasonable excuse for the act or omission mentioned in paragraph (a) of that subsection.(4) A person guilty of an offence under subsection (1) is liable—(a) on summary conviction, to imprisonment for a term not exceeding [F6the general limit in a magistrates’ court], to a fine or to both;(b) on conviction on indictment, to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 10 years, to a fine or to both.(a) 
86	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 3 – Public order CHAPTER 4 – Other provisions Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(5) In relation to an offence committed before the coming into force of paragraph 24(2) of Schedule 22 to the Sentencing Act 2020 (increase in magistrates’ court power to impose imprisonment) the reference in subsection (4)(a) to [F7the general limit in a magistrates’ court] is to be read as a reference to 6 months.(6) The common law offence of public nuisance is abolished.(7) Subsections (1) to (6) do not apply in relation to—(a) any act or omission which occurred before the coming into force of those subsections, or(b) any act or omission which began before the coming into force of those subsections and continues after their coming into force.(8) This section does not affect—(a) the liability of any person for an offence other than the common law offence of public nuisance,(b) the civil liability of any person for the tort of public nuisance, or(c) the ability to take any action under any enactment against a person for any act or omission within subsection (1).(9) In this section “enactment” includes an enactment comprised in subordinate legislation within the meaning of the Interpretation Act 1978.One-person protests79 Imposing conditions on one-person protests(1) After section 14 of the Public Order Act 1986 insert—“14ZA Imposing conditions on one-person protests(1) Subsection (2) applies if the senior police officer, having regard to the time or place at which and the circumstances in which any one-person protest in England and Wales is being carried on or is intended to be carried on, reasonably believes—(a) that the noise generated by the person carrying on the protest may result in serious disruption to the activities of an organisation which are carried on in the vicinity of the protest, or(b) that—(a) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)	87PART 3 – Public orderCHAPTER 4 – Other provisions Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have beenmade appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(i) the noise generated by the person carrying on the protest may have a relevant impact on persons in the vicinity of the protest, and(ii) that impact may be significant.(2) The senior police officer may give directions imposing on the person organising or carrying on the protest such conditions as appear to the officer necessary to prevent such disruption or impact.(3) Where the one-person protest is moving, or is intended to move, from place to place—(a) the senior police officer must also have regard under subsection (1) to its route or proposed route, and(b) the conditions which may be imposed under subsection (2) include conditions as to the route of the protest or prohibiting the person carrying on the protest from entering any public place specified in the direction while the person is carrying it on.(4) In this section “one-person protest” means a protest which, at any one time, is carried on by one person in a public place.(5) In this section “the senior police officer” means—(a) in relation to a one-person protest being held or to a one-person protest intended to be held in a case where a person is in a place with a view to carrying on such a protest, the most senior in rank of the police officers present at the scene, and(b) in relation to a one-person protest intended to be held in a case where paragraph (a) does not apply, the chief officer of police.(6) For the purposes of subsection (1)(a), the cases in which the noise generated by a person taking part in a one-person protest may result in serious disruption to the activities of an organisation which are carried on in the vicinity of the protest include, in particular, where it may result in persons connected with the organisation not being reasonably able, for a prolonged period of time, to carry on in that vicinity the activities or any one of them.(7) For the purposes of subsection (1)(b)(i), the noise generated by a person carrying on a one-person protest may have a relevant impact on persons in the vicinity of the protest if—(a) it may result in the intimidation or harassment of persons of reasonable firmness with the characteristics of persons likely to be in the vicinity, or(b) it may cause such persons to suffer alarm or distress.(8) In considering for the purposes of subsection (1)(b)(ii) whether the noise generated by a person carrying on a one-person protest may have a significant impact on persons in the vicinity of the protest, the senior police officer must have regard to—(a) the likely number of persons of the kind mentioned in paragraph (a) of subsection (7) who may experience an impact of the kind mentioned in paragraph (a) or (b) of that subsection,(b) the likely duration of that impact on such persons, and(c) the likely intensity of that impact on such persons.(a) 
88	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 3 – Public order CHAPTER 4 – Other provisions Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(9) A direction given by a chief officer of police by virtue of subsection (5)(b) must be given in writing.(10) A person (“P”) is guilty of an offence if—(a) P organises or carries on a one-person protest,(b) P fails to comply with a condition imposed under this section, and(c) at the time P fails to comply with the condition, P knows or ought to know that the condition has been imposed.(11) It is a defence for a person charged with an offence under subsection (10) to prove that the failure arose from circumstances beyond the person’s control.(12) A person who incites another to commit an offence under subsection (10) is guilty of an offence.(13) A person guilty of an offence under subsection (10) is liable on summary conviction to a fine not exceeding level 4 on the standard scale.(14) A person guilty of an offence under subsection (12) is liable on summary conviction to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 51 weeks or a fine not exceeding level 4 on the standard scale or both.(15) In relation to an offence committed before the coming into force of section 281(5) of the Criminal Justice Act 2003 (alteration of penalties for certain summary offences: England and Wales), the reference in subsection (14) to 51 weeks is to be read as a reference to 6 months.(16) The Secretary of State may by regulations amend subsection (6) for the purposes of making provision about the meaning for the purposes of this section of serious disruption to the activities of an organisation which are carried on in the vicinity of a one-person protest.(17) Regulations under subsection (16) may, in particular, amend that subsection for the purposes of—(a) defining any aspect of that expression for the purposes of this section;(b) giving examples of cases in which a one-person protest is or is not to be treated as resulting in serious disruption to the activities of an organisation which are carried on in the vicinity of the protest.(18) Regulations under subsection (16)—(a) are to be made by statutory instrument;(b) may make incidental, supplementary, consequential, transitional, transitory or saving provision, including provision which makes consequential amendments to this Part.(19) A statutory instrument containing regulations under subsection (16) may not be made unless a draft of the instrument has been laid before and approved by a resolution of each House of Parliament.”(2) The Secretary of State must, before the end of the period of 2 years beginning with the day on which this section comes into force—(a) prepare and publish a report on the operation of section 14ZA of the Public Order Act 1986, and(b) lay the report before Parliament.(a) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)	89PART 3 – Public orderCHAPTER 4 – Other provisions Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have beenmade appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesWilful obstruction of highway80 Wilful obstruction of highway(1) Section 137 of the Highways Act 1980 (penalty for wilful obstruction) is amended as follows.(2) In subsection (1)—(a) after “liable to” insert “imprisonment for a term not exceeding 51 weeks or”;(b) for “not exceeding level 3 on the standard scale” substitute “or both”.(3) After subsection (1) insert—“(1A) In relation to an offence committed before the coming into force of section 281(5) of the Criminal Justice Act 2003 (alteration of penalties for certain summary offences: England and Wales), the reference in subsection (1) to 51 weeks is to be read as a reference to 6 months.(1B) For the purposes of this section it does not matter whether free passage along the highway in question has already been temporarily restricted or temporarily prohibited (whether by a constable, a traffic authority or otherwise).(1C) In subsection (1B), “traffic authority” has the same meaning as in the Road Traffic Regulation Act 1984 (see section 121A of that Act).”
90	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 3 – Public order CHAPTER 4 – Other provisions Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(c) section 20 of the Criminal Justice Act 1967 (power of magistrates’ court to commit on bail for sentence);(d) in the Criminal Justice Act 1982—(i) section 70 and the italic heading immediately before that section (vagrancy offences), and(ii) paragraph 1 of Schedule 14 and the italic heading immediately before that paragraph (minor and consequential amendments);(e) section 43(5) of the Mental Health Act 1983 (power of magistrates’ courts to commit for restriction order);(f) section 26(5) of the Criminal Justice Act 1991 (alteration of certain penalties);(g) in the Criminal Justice Act 2003—(i) paragraphs 1 and 2 of Schedule 25 and the italic heading immediately before those paragraphs (summary offences no longer punishable with imprisonment), and(ii) paragraphs 145 and 146 of Schedule 32 and the italic heading immediately before those paragraphs (amendments relating to sentencing);(h) paragraph 18 of Schedule 8 to the Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (powers of accredited persons).(4) In section 81 of the Public Health Acts Amendment Act 1907 (extending definition of public place and street for certain purposes), omit the words from “shall”, in the first place it occurs, to “public place, and”.(5) In section 48(2) of the Forestry Act 1967 (powers of entry and enforcement), omit “or against the Vagrancy Act 1824”.(6) In the Police Reform Act 2002—(a) in Schedule 3C (powers of community support officers and community support volunteers)—(i) omit paragraph 3(3)(b),(ii) omit paragraph 7(3),(iii) in paragraph 7(4), omit “or (3)”, and(iv) in paragraph 7(7)(a), omit “or (3)”, and(b) in Schedule 5 (powers exercisable by accredited persons), omit paragraph 2(3) (aa).(7) In the Sentencing Code—(a) in section 20(1) (committal in certain cases where offender committed in respect of another offence)—(i) at the end of paragraph (e), insert “or”, and(ii) omit paragraph (g) (and the “or” immediately before it), and(b) omit section 24(1)(f) (further powers to commit offender to the Crown Court to be dealt with).(8) The amendments and repeals made by this section do not apply in relation to an offence committed before this section comes into force.(1) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)	91PART 3 – Public orderCHAPTER 4 – Other provisions Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have beenmade appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesExpedited public spaces protection orders82 Expedited public spaces protection orders(1) The Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is amended as follows.(2) After section 59 insert—“59A Power to make expedited public spaces protection orders(1) A local authority may make an expedited public spaces protection order (an “expedited order”) in relation to a public place within the local authority’s area if satisfied on reasonable grounds that three conditions are met.(2) The first condition is that the public place is in the vicinity of—(a) a school in the local authority’s area, or(b) a site in the local authority’s area where, or from which—(i) vaccines are provided to members of the public by, or pursuant to arrangements with, an NHS body, or(ii) test and trace services are provided.The reference in paragraph (b)(i) to arrangements includes arrangements made by the NHS body in the exercise of functions of another person by virtue of any provision of the National Health Service Act 2006.(3) The second condition is that activities carried on, or likely to be carried on, in the public place by one or more individuals in the course of a protest or demonstration have had, or are likely to have, the effect of—(a) harassing or intimidating members of staff or volunteers at the school or site,(b) harassing or intimidating persons using the services of the school or site,(c) impeding the provision of services by staff or volunteers at the school or site, or(d) impeding access by persons seeking to use the services of the school or site.(4) The third condition is that the effect or likely effect mentioned in subsection (3)—(a) is, or is likely to be, of a persistent or continuing nature,(b) is, or is likely to be, such as to make the activities unreasonable, and(c) justifies the restrictions imposed by the order.(5) An expedited order is an order that identifies the public place referred to in subsection (1) (“the restricted area”) and—(a) prohibits specified things being done in the restricted area,(a) 
92	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 3 – Public order CHAPTER 4 – Other provisions Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(b) requires specified things to be done by persons carrying on specified activities in that area, or(c) does both of those things.(6) The only prohibitions or requirements that may be imposed are ones that are reasonable to impose in order—(a) to prevent the harassment, intimidation or impediment referred to in subsection (3) from continuing, occurring or recurring, or(b) to reduce that harassment, intimidation or impediment or to reduce the risk of its continuance, occurrence or recurrence.(7) A prohibition or requirement may be framed—(a) so as to apply to all persons, or only to persons in specified categories, or to all persons except those in specified categories;(b) so as to apply at all times, or only at specified times, or at all times except those specified;(c) so as to apply in all circumstances, or only in specified circumstances, or in all circumstances except those specified.(8) An expedited order must—(a) identify the activities referred to in subsection (3);(b) explain the effect of section 63 (where it applies) and section 67;(c) specify the period for which the order has effect.(9) An expedited order may not be made in relation to a public place if that place (or any part of it) is or has been the subject of an expedited order (“the earlier order”), unless the period specified in subsection (11) has expired.(10) In subsection (9) the second reference to “an expedited order” is to be read as including a reference to a public spaces protection order (made after the day on which this section comes into force) which neither prohibited nor required anything that could not have been prohibited or required by an expedited order.(11) The period specified in this subsection is the period of a year beginning with the day on which the earlier order ceased to have effect.(12) An expedited order must be published in accordance with regulations made by the Secretary of State.(13) For the purposes of subsection (2), a public place that is coextensive with, includes, or is wholly or partly within, a school or site is regarded as being “in the vicinity of” that school or site.(14) In this section references to a “school” are to be read as including a 16 to 19 Academy.(15) In this section “test and trace services” means—(a) in relation to England, services of the programme known as NHS Test and Trace;(b) in relation to Wales, services of the programme known as Test, Trace, Protect.”(3) After section 60 insert—(1) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)	93PART 3 – Public orderCHAPTER 4 – Other provisions Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have beenmade appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes“60A Duration of expedited orders(1) An expedited order may not have effect for a period of more than 6 months.(2) Subject to subsection (1), the local authority that made an expedited order may, before the time when the order is due to expire, extend the period for which the order has effect if satisfied on reasonable grounds that doing so is necessary to prevent—(a) occurrence or recurrence after that time of the activities identified in the order, or(b) an increase in the frequency or seriousness of those activities after that time.(3) Where a local authority has made an expedited order, the authority may, at any time before the order is due to expire, reduce the period for which the order is to have effect if satisfied on reasonable grounds that the reduced period will be sufficient having regard to the degree of risk of an occurrence, recurrence or increase such as is mentioned in subsection (2)(a) or (b).(4) An extension or reduction under this section of the period for which an order has effect must be published in accordance with regulations made by the Secretary of State.(5) An expedited order may be extended or reduced under this section more than once.”(4) After section 72 insert—“72A Expedited orders: Convention rights and consents(1) A local authority, in deciding—(a) whether to make an expedited order (under section 59A) and if so what it should include,(b) whether to extend or reduce the period for which an expedited order has effect (under section 60A) and if so by how much,(c) whether to vary an expedited order (under section 61) and if so how, or(d) whether to discharge an expedited order (under section 61),must have particular regard to the rights of freedom of expression and freedom of assembly set out in articles 10 and 11 of the Convention.(2) In subsection (1) “Convention” has the meaning given by section 21(1) of the Human Rights Act 1998.(3) A local authority must obtain the necessary consents before—(a) making an expedited order,(b) extending or reducing the period for which an expedited order has effect, or(c) varying or discharging an expedited order.(4) If the order referred to in subsection (3) was made, or is proposed to be made, in reliance on section 59A(2)(a), “the necessary consents” means the consent of—(1) 
94	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 3 – Public order CHAPTER 4 – Other provisions Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(a) the chief officer of police for the police area that includes the restricted area, and(b) a person authorised (whether in specific or general terms) by the appropriate authority for the school or 16 to 19 Academy.(5) If the order referred to in subsection (3) was made, or is proposed to be made, in reliance on section 59A(2)(b), “the necessary consents” means the consent of—(a) the chief officer of police for the police area that includes the restricted area, and(b) a person authorised by the appropriate NHS authority.(6) In this section—“appropriate authority” means—(a) in relation to a school maintained by a local authority, the governing body;(b) in relation to any other school or a 16 to 19 Academy, the proprietor;“appropriate NHS authority” means—(a) if the order was made, or is proposed to be made, in reliance on sub-paragraph (i) of section 59A(2)(b), the NHS body mentioned in that sub-paragraph;(b) if the order was made, or is proposed to be made, in reliance on sub-paragraph (ii) of section 59A(2)(b) and the site is in England, the UK Health Security Agency;(c) if the order was made, or is proposed to be made, in reliance on that sub-paragraph and the site is in Wales, the Local Health Board for the area in which the site is located.(7) In this section “proprietor”, in relation to a school or a 16 to 19 Academy, has the meaning given in section 579(1) of the Education Act 1996.72B Consultation and notifications after making expedited order(1) A local authority must carry out the necessary consultation as soon as reasonably practicable after making an expedited order.(2) In subsection (1) “necessary consultation” means consulting with the following about the terms and effects of the order—(a) the chief officer of police, and the local policing body, for the police area that includes the restricted area;(b) whatever community representatives the local authority thinks it appropriate to consult;(c) the owner or occupier of land within the restricted area.(3) A local authority must carry out the necessary notification (if any) as soon as reasonably practicable after—(a) making an expedited order,(b) extending or reducing the period for which an expedited order has effect, or(c) varying or discharging an expedited order.(a) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)	95PART 4 – Unauthorised encampmentsCHAPTER 4 – Other provisions Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have beenmade appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(4) In subsection (3) “necessary notification” means notifying the following of the extension, reduction, variation or discharge—(a) the parish council or community council (if any) for the area that includes the restricted area;(b) in the case of an expedited order made by a district council in England, the county council (if any) for the area that includes the restricted area;(c) the owner or occupier of land within the restricted area.(5) The requirement to notify the owner or occupier of land within the restricted area—(a) does not apply to land that is owned or occupied by the local authority;(b) applies only if, and to the extent that, it is reasonably practicable to notify the owner or occupier of the land.”(5) Schedule 7 contains amendments relating to subsections (1) to (4).PART 4UNAUTHORISED ENCAMPMENTS83 Offence relating to residing on land without consent in or with a vehicle(1) At the beginning of Part 5 of the Criminal Justice and Public Order Act 1994, before the italic heading before section 61, insert—“Residing on land without consent in or with a vehicle60C Offence relating to residing on land without consent in or with a vehicle(1) Subsection (2) applies where—(a) a person aged 18 or over (“P”) is residing, or intending to reside, on land without the consent of the occupier of the land,(b) P has, or intends to have, at least one vehicle with them on the land,(c) one or more of the conditions mentioned in subsection (4) is satisfied, and(d) the occupier, a representative of the occupier or a constable requests P to do either or both of the following—(i) leave the land;(ii) remove from the land property that is in P’s possession or under P’s control.(2) P commits an offence if—(1) 
96	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 4 – Unauthorised encampments CHAPTER 4 – Other provisions Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(a)	P fails to comply with the request as soon as reasonably practicable, or(b)	P—(i) enters (or having left, re-enters) the land within the prohibited period with the intention of residing there without the consent of the occupier of the land, and(ii) has, or intends to have, at least one vehicle with them on the land.(3) The prohibited period is the period of 12 months beginning with the day on which the request was made.(4) The conditions are—(a) in a case where P is residing on the land, significant damage or significant disruption has been caused or is likely to be caused as a result of P’s residence;(b) in a case where P is not yet residing on the land, it is likely that significant damage or significant disruption would be caused as a result of P’s residence if P were to reside on the land;(c) that significant damage or significant disruption has been caused or is likely to be caused as a result of conduct carried on, or likely to be carried on, by P while P is on the land;(d) that significant distress has been caused or is likely to be caused as a result of offensive conduct carried on, or likely to be carried on, by P while P is on the land.(5) A person guilty of an offence under this section is liable on summary conviction to imprisonment for a term not exceeding three months or a fine not exceeding level 4 on the standard scale, or both.(6) In proceedings for an offence under this section it is a defence for the accused to show that the accused had a reasonable excuse for—(a) failing to comply as soon as reasonably practicable with the request mentioned in subsection (1)(d), or(b) after receiving such a request, entering (or re-entering) the land with the intention of residing there without the consent of the occupier of the land.(7) In its application to common land, this section has effect—(a) in a case where the common land is land to which the public has access and the occupier cannot be identified, as if references to the occupier were references to the local authority in relation to the common land;(b) in a case where P’s residence or intended residence without the consent of the occupier is, or would be, an infringement of the commoners’ rights and—(i) the occupier is aware of P’s residence or intended residence and had an opportunity to consent to it, or(ii) if sub-paragraph (i) does not apply, any one or more of the commoners took reasonable steps to try to inform the occupier of P’s residence or intended residence and provide an opportunity to consent to it,as if in subsection (1)(d) after “a constable” there were inserted “or the commoners or any of them or their representative”.
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)	97PART 4 – Unauthorised encampmentsCHAPTER 4 – Other provisions Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have beenmade appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(8) In this section--  “common land” and “commoner” have the same meaning as in section 61;“damage” includes—(a) damage to the land;(b) damage to any property on the land not belonging to P;(c) damage to the environment (including excessive noise, smells, litter or deposits of waste);“disruption” includes interference with—(a) a person’s ability to access any services or facilities located on the land or otherwise make lawful use of the land, or(b) a supply of water, energy or fuel;“land” does not include buildings other than—(a) agricultural buildings within the meaning of paragraphs 3 to 8 of Schedule 5 to the Local Government Finance Act 1988, or(b) scheduled monuments within the meaning of the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Areas Act 1979;  “the local authority”, in relation to common land, has the same meaning as in section 61;  “occupier” means the person entitled to possession of the land by virtue of an estate or interest held by the person;“offensive conduct” means—(a) the use of threatening, abusive or insulting words or behaviour, or disorderly behaviour, or(b) the display of any writing, sign, or other visible representation that is threatening, abusive or insulting;“vehicle” includes—(a) any vehicle, whether or not it is in a fit state for use on roads, and includes any chassis or body, with or without wheels, appearing to have formed part of such a vehicle, and any load carried by, and anything attached to, such a vehicle, and(b) a caravan as defined in section 29(1) of the Caravan Sites and Control of Development Act 1960.(9) For the purposes of this section a person is to be considered as residing or having the intention to reside in a place even if that residence or intended residence is temporary, and a person may be regarded as residing or having an intention to reside in a place notwithstanding that the person has a home elsewhere.60D Offence under section 60C: seizure of property etc(1) If a constable reasonably suspects that an offence has been committed under section 60C, the constable may seize and remove any relevant property that appears to the constable—(a) to belong to the person who the constable suspects has committed the offence (“P”);(b) to be in P’s possession; or(c) to be under P’s control.(a) 
98	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 4 – Unauthorised encampments CHAPTER 4 – Other provisions Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(2) “Relevant property” means—(a) a vehicle (wherever located) which, for the purposes of section 60C(1)(b) (in the case of an offence under section 60C(2)(a)) or for the purposes of section 60C(2)(b)(ii) (in the case of an offence under section 60C(2)(b)), the constable suspects P had or intended to have with them, or(b)  any other property that is on the relevant land.(3) The “relevant land” is the land in respect of which a request under section 60C(1)(d) is made.(4) The relevant chief officer of police may retain any property that has been seized under subsection (1) until the end of the period of three months beginning with the day of the seizure (“the relevant period”).(5) But the relevant chief officer of police ceases to be entitled to retain the property if before the end of the relevant period a custody officer gives written notice to P that P is not to be prosecuted for the offence under section 60C in relation to which the property was seized.(And see subsection (10)).(6) Subsection (7) applies where before the end of the relevant period proceedings for an offence under section 60C are commenced against P.(7) Where this subsection applies the relevant chief officer of police may retain the property seized until the conclusion of proceedings relating to the offence (including any appeal) (but see subsection (10)).(8) Where a chief officer of police ceases to be entitled to retain property under this section the chief officer must, subject to any order for forfeiture under section 60E, return it to the person whom the chief officer believes to be its owner.(9) If a chief officer of police cannot after reasonable inquiry identify a person for the purposes of subsection (8)—(a) the chief officer must apply to a magistrates’ court for directions, and(b) the court must make an order about the treatment of the property.(10) If at any time a person other than P satisfies a chief officer of police that property that is retained by the chief officer under this section—(a) belongs to the person at that time, and(b) belonged to them at the time of the suspected offence under section 60C,the chief officer must return the property to the person.(11) Subsection (10) does not apply in relation to a vehicle belonging to a person other than P if the chief officer of police reasonably believes that the vehicle was, with the consent of the other person, in P’s possession or under P’s control at the time of the suspected offence under section 60C.(12) For the purposes of subsection (6), proceedings are commenced when—(a) a written charge is issued under section 29(1) of the Criminal Justice Act 2003,(a) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)	99PART 4 – Unauthorised encampmentsCHAPTER 4 – Other provisions Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have beenmade appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(b) a person is charged under Part 4 of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984, or(c) an information is laid under section 1 of the Magistrates’ Courts Act 1980.(13) For the purposes of this section—(a) the relevant chief officer of police is the chief officer of the police force for the area in which the property was seized, and(b) “vehicle” has the same meaning as in section 60C.60E Offence under section 60C: forfeiture(1) A court that convicts a person of an offence under section 60C may order any property to which subsection (2) applies to be forfeited and dealt with in a manner specified in the order.(2) This subsection applies to any property that—(a) was seized under section 60D(1), and(b) is retained by a chief officer of police under that section.(3) Before making an order for the forfeiture of property the court must—(a) permit anyone who claims to be its owner or to have an interest in it to make representations, and(b) consider its value and the likely consequences of forfeiture.”(2) In the heading to Part 5 of the Criminal Justice and Public Order Act 1994, after “Order:” insert “Unauthorised encampments and ”.84 Amendments to existing powers(1) The Criminal Justice and Public Order Act 1994 is amended as follows.(2) Section 61 (power to remove trespassers on land) is amended in accordance with subsections (3) to (7).(3) In subsection (1)—(a) in paragraph (a), after “persons” insert “—(i) in the case of persons trespassing on land in England and Wales, has caused damage, disruption or distress (see subsection (10));(ii) in the case of persons trespassing on land in Scotland,”, and(b) at the beginning of paragraph (b) insert “in either case,”.(4) In subsection (4)(b) for “period of three months beginning with the day on which the direction was given” substitute “prohibited period”.(5) After subsection (4) insert—(1) 
100	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 4 – Unauthorised encampments CHAPTER 4 – Other provisions Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes“(4ZA) The prohibited period is—(a) in the case of a person trespassing on land in England and Wales, the period of twelve months beginning with the day on which the direction was given;(b) in the case of a person trespassing on land in Scotland, the period of three months beginning with the day on which the direction was given.”(6) In subsection (9), in the definition of “land”, in paragraph (b)—(a) in the words before sub-paragraph (i), after “land” insert “in Scotland”, and(b) omit sub-paragraph (i) (together with the final “or”).(7) After subsection (9) insert—“(10) For the purposes of subsection (1)(a)(i)—“damage” includes—(a) damage to the land;(b) damage to any property on the land not belonging to the persons trespassing;(c) damage to the environment (including excessive noise, smells, litter or deposits of waste);“disruption” includes an interference with—(a) a person’s ability to access any services or facilities located on the land or otherwise make lawful use of the land, or(b) a supply of water, energy or fuel; “distress” means distress caused by—(a) the use of threatening, abusive or insulting words or behaviour, or disorderly behaviour, or(b) the display of any writing, sign, or other visible representation that is threatening, abusive or insulting.”(8) In section 62 (powers to seize property related to offence under section 61)—(a) in subsection (1)(b) for “period of three months beginning with the day on which the direction was given” substitute “prohibited period”, and(b) after subsection (1) insert—“(1A) The prohibited period is—(a) in the case of a person trespassing on land in England and Wales, the period of twelve months beginning with the day on which the direction was given;(a) in the case of a person trespassing on land in Scotland, the period of three months beginning with the day on which the direction was given.”(9) In section 62B(2) (failure to comply with direction under section 62A: offences) for “3” substitute “twelve”.(10) In section 62C(2) (failure to comply with direction under section 62A: seizure) for “3” substitute “twelve”.(11) In section 68(5) (offence of aggravated trespass), for paragraph (a) substitute—(1) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32) PART 4 – Unauthorised encampmentsCHAPTER 4 – Other provisions Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
101
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes“(a) a highway unless it is a footpath, bridleway or byway open to all traffic within the meaning of Part 3 of the Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981, is a restricted byway within the meaning of Part 2 of the Countryside and Rights of Way Act 2000 or is a cycle track under the Highways Act 1980 or the Cycle Tracks Act 1984;(aa)  a road within the meaning of the Roads (Scotland) Act 1984 unless it falls within the definitions in section 151(2)(a)(ii) or (b) (footpaths and cycle tracks) of that Act or is a bridleway within the meaning of section 47 of the Countryside (Scotland) Act 1967; or”.(12) The amendments made by subsections (4), (5), (8), (9) and (10) do not apply in relation to a direction given under section 61 or 62A of the Criminal Justice and Public Order Act 1994 before the coming into force of this section.85 Guidance on exercise of police powers in respect of trespassers on land etcAfter section 62E of the Criminal Justice and Public Order Act 1994 insert—“62F Guidance(1) The Secretary of State must issue guidance relating to the exercise of—(a) the functions of police officers in England and Wales, and  (b) the functions of constables in England and Wales, under the provisions mentioned in subsection (2).(2) Those provisions are—(a) sections 60C to 62E, and(b) regulations under section 67 relating to vehicles seized under section 62(1) or section 62C(3).(3) Police officers in England and Wales and constables in England and Wales must have regard to the guidance when exercising any of those functions conferred on them.(4) The Secretary of State may from time to time revise the guidance.(5) The Secretary of State must arrange for the guidance and any revised guidance issued under this section to be published in such manner as the Secretary of State considers appropriate.(6) The Secretary of State must lay before Parliament a copy of any guidance or revised guidance published under subsection (5).”
102	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 5 – Road traffic CHAPTER 4 – Other provisions Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesPART 5ROAD TRAFFICRoad traffic offences86 Causing death by dangerous driving or careless driving when under the influence of drink or drugs: increased penalties(1) Part 1 of Schedule 2 to the Road Traffic Offenders Act 1988 (prosecution and punishment of offences: offences under the Traffic Acts) is amended as follows.(2) In the entry relating to section 1 of the Road Traffic Act 1988 (causing death by dangerous driving), in column (4) (punishment), for “14 years” substitute “Imprisonment for life”.(3) In the entry relating to section 3A of the Road Traffic Act 1988 (causing death by careless driving when under influence of drink or drugs), in column (4) (punishment), for “14 years” substitute “Imprisonment for life”.(4) Section 34 of the Road Traffic Offenders Act 1988 (disqualification for certain offences) is amended as follows.(5) In subsection (3), in the words after paragraph (d)—(a) after “the offence” insert “(“the new offence”)”;(b) for “three years” substitute “the period specified in subsection (3A)”.(6) After subsection (3) insert— “(3A) The period is—(a) six years, where—(i) an offence of which the person was convicted within the ten years mentioned in subsection (3) falls within paragraph (aa) of that subsection, and(ii) the new offence also falls within that paragraph;(b) in any other case (but subject to subsection (4ZA)), three years.”(7) In subsection (4)—(a) in the words before paragraph (a), after “(3) above” insert “and subsection (4ZA) below”;(b) in paragraph (a)—(i) omit sub-paragraph (ii) (and the “or” after it);(ii) in sub-paragraph (iia), for “that Act” substitute “the Road Traffic Act 1988”;(iii) omit sub-paragraph (iii) (and the “or” before it, but not the “and” after it).(8) After subsection (4) insert—“(4ZA) Subsection (1) shall apply as if the reference to twelve months were a reference to five years in relation to a person convicted of—(a) an offence under section 1 of the Road Traffic Act 1988 (causing death by dangerous driving), or(a) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32) PART 5 – Road trafficCHAPTER 4 – Other provisions Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
103
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(b) an offence under section 3A of that Act (causing death by careless driving when under the influence of drink or drugs),but this is subject to subsection (3) in cases within paragraph (a) of subsection (3A).”(9) A provision of this section does not apply in relation to offences committed before the provision comes into force.87 Causing serious injury by careless, or inconsiderate, driving(1) In the Road Traffic Act 1988, after section 2B (causing death by careless, or inconsiderate, driving) insert—“2C Causing serious injury by careless, or inconsiderate, driving(1) A person who causes serious injury to another person by driving a mechanically propelled vehicle on a road or other public place without due care and attention, or without reasonable consideration for other persons using the road or place, is guilty of an offence.(2) In this section “serious injury” means—(a) in England and Wales, physical harm which amounts to grievous bodily harm for the purposes of the Offences against the Person Act 1861, and(b) in Scotland, severe physical injury.”(2) In section 3ZA of that Act (meaning of careless, or inconsiderate, driving), in subsection (1), after “sections 2B” insert “, 2C”.(3) In Part 1 of Schedule 2 to the Road Traffic Offenders Act 1988 (prosecution and punishment of offences: offences under the Traffic Acts), after the entry relating to section 2B of the Road Traffic Act 1988 insert—
“RTA
Causing  serious
(a)
(a)	On
Obligatory
Obligatory
3-11
section 2Cinjury	bycareless,	or inconsiderate, driving
SummarilyOn conviction in Scotland: 12 months or the statutory maximum or both
conviction in England and Wales: 12 months or a fine or both
104	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 3B – Courses offered as alternative to prosecution CHAPTER 4 – Other provisions Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
(b)	Onindictment
(b) 2 years or a fine or both ”
(4) In the entries in Part 1 of Schedule 2 to the Road Traffic Offenders Act 1988 relating to an offence under section 2C of the Road Traffic Act 1988 (causing serious injury by careless, or inconsiderate, driving), in relation to an offence committed before paragraph 24(2) of Schedule 22 to the Sentencing Act 2020 comes into force, the reference in column (4) (punishment) to 12 months on summary conviction in England and Wales is to be read as a reference to 6 months.88 Road traffic offences: minor and consequential amendmentsSchedule 8 contains amendments relating to sections 86 and 87.Courses offered as an alternative to prosecution89 Courses offered as alternative to prosecution: fees etc(1) After section 90F of the Road Traffic Offenders Act 1988 insert—“PART 3BCOURSES OFFERED AS ALTERNATIVE TO PROSECUTION90G Power to charge fees: England and Wales(1) A policing body may charge a fee for enrolment on an approved course offered as an alternative to prosecution in England and Wales for a specified fixed penalty offence.(2) A fee may be set at a level that exceeds the cost of an approved course and related administrative expenses, but any excess must be used for the purpose of promoting road safety.(3) The Secretary of State may by regulations make further provision about—(a) how fees, or components of fees, are to be calculated;(b) the level of fees or components of fees;(c) the use of fee income.(a) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32) PART 3B – Courses offered as alternative to prosecution CHAPTER 4 – Other provisionsDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
105
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(4) The regulations may include provision as to the amount, or maximum amount, of a fee or component of a fee.(5) In this section—  “approved course” means a course approved (whether before or after this section comes into force) by a body specified in regulations under subsection (6);  “fixed penalty offence” means an offence that is a fixed penalty offence for the purposes of Part 3 (see section 51);“policing body” means—(a) a local policing body, or(b) the British Transport Police Authority;  “promoting road safety” includes the prevention, detection or enforcement of offences relating to vehicles;  “prosecution”, in relation to an offence, includes any alternative way of being dealt with for the offence (other than attending an approved course);  “specified fixed penalty offence” means an offence specified under subsection (6).(6) The Secretary of State may by regulations—(a) specify fixed penalty offences for the purposes of this section;(b) specify a body to approve courses for the purposes of this section.(7) Nothing in this section limits any power to charge fees apart from this section.90H Power to prevent courses being offered for repeat offences: England and Wales(1) The Secretary of State may by regulations prohibit a chief officer from offering an approved course to a person as an alternative to prosecution in England and Wales for a specified fixed penalty offence where—(a) there is a course fee, and(b) the person has, within a period specified in the regulations, satisfactorily completed a similar approved course in respect of an earlier specified fixed penalty offence.(2) The regulations must include provision for the purpose of identifying what counts as a “similar” course; and that provision may, in particular, confer power on a person to determine what courses count as similar.(3) In this section “chief officer” means—(a) a chief officer of police of a police force in England and Wales, or(b) the Chief Constable of the British Transport Police Force.(4) In this section the following terms have the meaning given by section 90G(5)—“approved course”; “prosecution”;“specified fixed penalty offence”.
106	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 4B – Courses offered as alternative to prosecution CHAPTER 4 – Other provisions Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes90I Further provision about regulations under this Part(1) A power to make regulations under this Part is exercisable by statutory instrument.(2) A statutory instrument containing regulations made by the Secretary of State under this Part is subject to annulment in pursuance of a resolution of either House of Parliament.(3) Regulations under this Part may include—(a) incidental or supplementary provision;(b) different provision for different purposes.”(2) After Article 91F of the Road Traffic Offenders (Northern Ireland) Order 1996 (S.I. 1996/1320 (N.I. 10)) insert—“PART 4BCOURSES OFFERED AS ALTERNATIVE TO PROSECUTION91G	Power to charge fees(1) The Chief Constable may charge a fee for enrolment on an approved course offered as an alternative to prosecution for a specified fixed penalty offence.(2) A fee may be set at a level that exceeds the cost of an approved course and related administrative expenses, but any excess must be used for the purpose of promoting road safety.(3) The power in paragraph (1) may be exercised only with the approval in writing of the Policing Board.Such approval may be given—(a) generally or specifically, and(b) subject to conditions.(4) The Department of Justice may by regulations make further provision about—(a) how fees, or components of fees, are to be calculated;(b) the level of fees or components of fees;(c) the use of fee income.(5) The regulations may include provision as to the amount, or maximum amount, of a fee or component of a fee.(6) In this Article—  “approved course” means a course approved (whether before or after this Article comes into operation) by a body specified in regulations under paragraph (7);  “fixed penalty offence” means an offence that is a fixed penalty offence for the purposes of Part 4 (see Article 57);  “promoting road safety” includes the prevention, detection or enforcement of offences relating to vehicles;  
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32) PART 4B – Courses offered as alternative to prosecution CHAPTER 4 – Other provisionsDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
107
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes  “prosecution”, in relation to an offence, includes any alternative way of being dealt with for the offence (other than attending an approved course);  “specified fixed penalty offence” means an offence specified under paragraph (7).(7) The Department of Justice may by regulations—(a) specify fixed penalty offences for the purposes of this Article;(b) specify a body to approve courses for the purposes of this Article.(8) Nothing in this Article limits any power to charge fees apart from this Article.91H	Power to prevent courses being offered for repeat offences(1) The Department of Justice may by regulations prohibit the Chief Constable from offering an approved course to a person as an alternative to prosecution for a specified fixed penalty offence where—(a) there is a course fee, and(b) the person has, within a period specified in the regulations, satisfactorily completed a similar approved course in respect of an earlier specified fixed penalty offence.(2) The regulations must include provision for the purpose of identifying what counts as a “similar” course; and that provision may, in particular, confer power on a person to determine what courses count as similar.(3) In this Article the following terms have the meaning given by Article 91G(6)—“approved course”; “prosecution”;“specified fixed penalty offence”.91I	Further provision about regulations under this Part(1) Regulations under this Part are subject to negative resolution.(2) Regulations under Article 91G(4) may be made only with the consent of the Department of Finance.(3) Regulations under this Part may include such incidental or supplementary provision as appears to the Department of Justice to be necessary or expedient.”(3) The Secretary of State may by regulations amend Part 3B of the Road Traffic Offenders Act 1988 for the purpose of making provision corresponding or similar to section 90G or 90H of that Act in relation to courses offered as an alternative to prosecution in Scotland for a fixed penalty offence.(4) In subsection (3) “fixed penalty offence” means an offence that is a fixed penalty offence for the purposes of Part 3 of the Road Traffic Offenders Act 1988 (see section 51 of that Act).(5) The Secretary of State must consult the Lord Advocate before making regulations under subsection (3).(1) 
108	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 4B – Courses offered as alternative to prosecution CHAPTER 4 – Other provisions Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(6) The power to make regulations under subsection (3) is exercisable by statutory instrument.(7) A statutory instrument containing regulations under subsection (3) may not be made unless a draft of the instrument has been laid before and approved by a resolution of each House of Parliament.Removal etc of abandoned vehicles90 Charges for removal, storage and disposal of vehicles(1) Section 102 of the Road Traffic Regulation Act 1984 (charges for removal, storage and disposal of vehicles), as it forms part of the law of England and Wales, is amended as follows.(2) In subsection (2), for the words before paragraph (a) substitute “In any such case (but subject in the case of a local authority to subsection (2A))—”.(3) For subsection (2A) substitute—“(2A) In the case of a vehicle removed, on any ground mentioned in subsection (1), from an area that is a civil enforcement area for parking contraventions—(a) subsection (2) does not apply to the recovery of charges by a local authority, but(b) the enforcement authority is entitled to recover from any person responsible such charges in respect of the removal, storage and disposal of the vehicle as they may require in accordance with Schedule 9 to the Traffic Management Act 2004.”Surrender of driving licences91 Production of licence to the court(1) The Road Traffic Offenders Act 1988 is amended as follows.(2) In section 7 (trial: duty of accused to provide licence to the court)—(a) for subsection (1) substitute— “(1) Where—(a) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32) PART 4B – Courses offered as alternative to prosecution CHAPTER 4 – Other provisionsDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
109
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(a) a person who is the holder of a licence is prosecuted for an offence involving obligatory or discretionary disqualification,(b) there is a hearing, and(c) the person attends the hearing,the person must bring the licence to the hearing.”;(b) omit subsections (1A), (1B), (1C) and (2).(3) In section 27 (sentence: production of licence to the court)—(a) for subsection (1) substitute—“(1) Where—(a) a person who is the holder of a licence is convicted of an offence involving obligatory or discretionary disqualification, and(b) a court proposes to make, or makes, an order disqualifying the person,the court may require the licence to be produced to it.”;(b) in subsection (3)(b), at the beginning insert “unless the licence is already treated as being revoked under section 37(1),”.92 Surrender of licence to Secretary of State where disqualified(1) After section 37 of the Road Traffic Offenders Act 1988 insert—“37A Surrender of licence to Secretary of State where disqualified(1) This section applies where—(a) a person who is the holder of a licence is disqualified by an order of a court, and(b) the Secretary of State is not already in receipt of the licence.(2) The Secretary of State may serve on the person a notice in writing requiring the person to surrender the licence to the Secretary of State at such address as the Secretary of State may determine, before the end of the period of 28 days beginning with the date on which the notice is served.(3) A notice under subsection (2) may be served on a person—(a) by delivering it to the person,(b) by leaving it at the person’s proper address, or(c) by sending it to the person by post.(4) A person who, without reasonable excuse, fails to comply with a notice under subsection (2) is guilty of an offence.(5) For the purposes of—(1) 
110	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 4B – Courses offered as alternative to prosecution CHAPTER 4 – Other provisions Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(a) subsection (3), and(b) section 7 of the Interpretation Act 1978 in its application to subsection (3),a person’s “proper address” is the person’s latest address as known to the Secretary of State.”(2) In Part 1 of Schedule 2 to the Road Traffic Offenders Act 1988 (prosecution and punishment of offences), before the entry relating to section 62 of that Act, insert—
“Section	37A(4)	of this Act
Failure to surrender licence to Secretary of State
Summarily
Level	3	on	the standard scale”
93 Removal of requirement to surrender licence where fixed penalty notice(1) The Road Traffic Offenders Act 1988 is amended as follows.(2) In section 52 (fixed penalty notices), after subsection (2) insert—“(2A) A fixed penalty notice must give details of the identification information (as defined in section 69(3D)) that may be required under section 69 where the notice relates to an offence involving obligatory endorsement.”(3) In section 54 (notices on-the-spot etc)—(a) in subsection (3)—(i) omit “, and” at the end of paragraph (a);(ii) omit paragraph (b);(b) omit subsections (4), (5), (5A), (5B), (6), (7) and (9).(4) In section 69 (payment of penalties)—(a) in subsection (2), after “method” insert “and subject to subsection (2A)”;(b) after that subsection, insert—“(2A) Where a person has been given a fixed penalty notice under section 54 in respect of an offence involving obligatory endorsement, payment of the penalty may be made as mentioned in subsection (2) only if the letter also contains identification information.”;(c) after subsection (3), insert—“(3A) Subsection (3B) applies where—(a) a person has been given a fixed penalty notice under section 54 in respect of an offence involving obligatory endorsement, and(b) a method of payment other than that mentioned in subsection (2) is used.(a) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32) PART 4B – Courses offered as alternative to prosecution CHAPTER 4 – Other provisionsDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
111
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(3B) The penalty is treated as having been paid to the fixed penalty clerk or the Secretary of State in accordance with this Part only if the person—(a) fulfils the identification requirements, and(b) makes payment of the penalty to the clerk or the Secretary of State.(3C) A person fulfils the identification requirements if—(a) the person provides the clerk or the Secretary of State with identification information, or(b) the clerk or the Secretary of State is otherwise satisfied of the person’s identity.(3D) In this section “identification information” means—(a) the person’s name and date of birth, and(b) if the person is the holder of a licence, the licence number.”94 Removal of requirement to deliver up licence where conditional offer(1) The Road Traffic Offenders Act 1988 is amended as follows.(2) In section 75 (issue of conditional offer)—(a) in subsection (7), after paragraph (b) (but before the “and” immediately after it) insert—“(ba) give details of the identification information that may be required where the conditional offer relates to an offence involving obligatory endorsement,”;(b) in subsection (8A)(a), for sub-paragraph (ii) substitute—“(ii) where the conditional offer relates to an offence involving obligatory endorsement, fulfils the identification requirements,”;(c) after subsection (8A) insert—“(8B) For the purposes of subsection (8A)(a)(ii), an alleged offender fulfils the identification requirements if—(a) the alleged offender provides the appropriate person with identification information, or(b) the appropriate person is otherwise satisfied of the alleged offender’s identity.(8C) In this section “identification information” means—(a) the alleged offender’s name and date of birth, and(b) if the alleged offender is the holder of a licence, the licence number.”(3) In section 76 (effect of offer and payment of penalty)—(1) 
112	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 4B – Courses offered as alternative to prosecution CHAPTER 4 – Other provisions Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(a) in subsection (2), for “makes payment of the fixed penalty in accordance with the conditional offer” substitute “has fulfilled the conditions specified in the conditional offer under section 75(8A)(a)”;(b) in subsection (3)(b), omit the words from “together” to “his licence”;(c) in subsection (4), for the words from “requirements” to “fulfilled” substitute “alleged offender has not fulfilled the conditions specified in the conditional offer under section 75(8A)(a)”.(4) In section 77A (endorsement of driving records where penalty paid)—(a) for subsection (1)(a) substitute—“(a)	a conditional offer has been issued to a person (“the alleged offender”) under section 75(1), (2) or (3),”;(b) in subsection (1)(b), for “76” substitute “76(2)”;(c) in subsection (1), in the words after paragraph (b), omit “together with any licence delivered under paragraph (a) above”;(d) in subsection (2), in the words before paragraph (a), omit “and return any licence delivered to him under this section to the alleged offender”;(e) for subsection (2)(b) substitute—“(b)	in a case where—(i) a conditional offer is issued to a person (“the alleged offender”) under section 75(1A) or (3B), and(ii) proceedings against the alleged offender are excluded by section 76(2).”95 Surrender of licences and test certificates by new driversSchedule 9 contains amendments to the Road Traffic (New Drivers) Act 1995 which make provision about the surrender of driving licences and test certificates in the case of new drivers.96 Minor and consequential amendmentsSchedule 10 contains minor and consequential amendments.
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32) PART 6 – CautionsCHAPTER 4 – Other provisions Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
113
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesFixed penalty notices in Scotland97 Power to issue fixed penalty notices on-the-spot in Scotland(1) In section 54(1) of the Road Traffic Offenders Act 1988 (notices on-the-spot etc.), omit “in England and Wales”.(2) In section 75(4) of that Act (issue of conditional offer: restrictions), after “notice” insert “in respect of the offence has been given under section 54 of this Act or”.(3) Paragraph 103(2) of Schedule 4 to the Road Traffic Act 1991 (amendment to section 54 of the Road Traffic Offenders Act 1988 which is superseded by provision made by this section) is omitted.PART 6CAUTIONS
114	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 6 – Cautions CHAPTER 4 – Other provisions Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesPROSPECTIVEDiversionary cautions99 Giving a diversionary caution(1) An authorised person may give a diversionary caution to a person aged 18 or over (“the offender”) in respect of an offence if the following requirements are met.(2) The requirements are that—(a) an authorised person or a prosecution authority decides—(i) that there is sufficient evidence to charge the offender with the offence, and(ii) that a diversionary caution should be given to the offender in respect of the offence;(b) the offender admits having committed the offence;(c) the offender consents to being given the caution;(d) an authorised person—(i) explains the effect of the caution to the offender, and(ii) in particular, warns the offender that failure to comply with any of the conditions attached to the caution may result in prosecution for the offence;(e) the offender signs a document which contains—(i) details of the offence,(ii) the offender’s admission to having committed the offence,(iii) the offender’s consent to being given the caution, and(iv) the conditions attached to the caution.(3) But if the offence is an indictable-only offence, the authorised person may not give a diversionary caution to the offender except—(a) in exceptional circumstances relating to the person or the offence, and(b) with the consent of the Director of Public Prosecutions.(4) A diversionary caution may not be given in respect of an offence committed before the coming into force of this section.(1) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32) PART 6 – CautionsCHAPTER 4 – Other provisions Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
115
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(5) The power to give a diversionary caution under subsection (1) is also subject to regulations under section 117 (restrictions on multiple use of cautions).100 Deciding on the conditions(1) The conditions attached to a diversionary caution are to be decided upon by—(a) an authorised person, or(b) in a case where a prosecution authority has taken the decision that the caution should be given, the prosecution authority.(2) The conditions which may be attached to a diversionary caution are those authorised by—(a) section 101 (rehabilitation and reparation conditions),(b) section 102 (financial penalty conditions), and(c) section 103 (conditions relating to certain foreign offenders).(3) When deciding what conditions to attach to a diversionary caution the authorised person or prosecution authority must—(a) make reasonable efforts, or ensure that reasonable efforts are or have been made, to obtain the views of any victim or victims of the offence, and(b) take those views into account.(4) The views referred to in subsection (3) include in particular views as to whether the offender should carry out any of the actions listed in the community remedy document.(5) Where it is the view of the victim or all the victims that the offender should carry out a particular action listed in the community remedy document, the authorised person or prosecution authority must attach that as a condition unless it seems to the authorised person or prosecution authority—(a) the action is not one that can be attached as a condition to a diversionary caution, or(b) it would be inappropriate to do so.101 Rehabilitation and reparation conditions(1) Conditions with one or both of the objects in subsection (2) may be attached to a diversionary caution.(2) The objects are—(a) facilitating the rehabilitation of the offender;(b) ensuring that the offender makes reparation for the offence.(a) 
116	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 6 – Cautions CHAPTER 4 – Other provisions Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(3) The conditions which may be attached to a diversionary caution for the objects referred to in subsection (2) include—(a) restrictive conditions,(b) unpaid work conditions, and(c) attendance conditions.(4) A restrictive condition is a condition requiring the offender—(a) not to meet or communicate with specified individuals;(b) not to be in, or go to, specified addresses, places or areas in the United Kingdom;(c) not to carry out or participate in specified activities;(d) not to engage in specified conduct (which may include conduct constituting a criminal offence).(5) An unpaid work condition is a condition requiring the offender to carry out unpaid work of a specified description for a specified number of hours, which may not exceed 20.(6) An attendance condition is a condition requiring the offender to attend a specified place—(a) for a specified purpose, and(b) for a specified number of hours, which may not exceed 20 where the condition only has the object referred to in subsection (2)(b).(7) Where an attendance condition requires the offender to attend somewhere for the purpose of participating in any education or training, or receiving any other service, the attendance condition may also require the offender to pay for the reasonable cost of the provision of the education, training or service to the offender.(8) Regulations may amend subsection (5) or (6)(b) (or both) so as to substitute a different number of hours.(9) A condition authorised by this section may—(a) contain further details as to how it must be complied with (including the times at or between which something must or must not be done);(b) provide for those details to be supplied, after the giving of the caution, by a specified person or a person of a specified description.(10) A condition authorised by this section may not require a person to remain at their own or anyone else’s residence for any period of time.(11) In this section “specified” means specified in the caution.102 Financial penalty conditions(1) A condition requiring the offender to pay a financial penalty may be attached to a diversionary caution with the object of punishing the offender.(1) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32) PART 6 – CautionsCHAPTER 4 – Other provisions Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
117
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(2) The condition must specify—(a) the amount of the financial penalty,(b) the person to whom the financial penalty must be paid,(c) how it must or may be paid, and(d) the date on or before which it must be paid.(3) The amount specified under subsection (2)(a) must not exceed an amount prescribed in regulations.(4) Where the person specified under subsection (2)(b) is not the designated officer for a magistrates’ court, once the penalty is paid to that person they must give it to such an officer.(5) The date specified under subsection (2)(d) must be the last day of the period of 28 days beginning with the day on which the caution is given.103 Foreign offenders’ conditions(1) Where a diversionary caution is given to a relevant foreign offender, a condition with one or both of the objects in subsection (2) may be attached to it.(2) The objects are—(a) bringing about the departure of the relevant foreign offender from the United Kingdom;(b) ensuring that the relevant foreign offender does not return to the United Kingdom for a period of time.(3) If a diversionary caution has a condition with the object referred to in subsection (2) (b), the expiry of the period does not of itself give rise to any right on the part of the offender to return to the United Kingdom.(4) In this section “relevant foreign offender” means—(a) an offender directions for whose removal from the United Kingdom have been, or may be, given under Schedule 2 to the Immigration Act 1971 or section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999, or(b) an offender against whom a deportation order under section 5 of the Immigration Act 1971 is in force.104 Variation of conditionsAn authorised person or prosecution authority may, with the consent of the offender, vary the conditions attached to a diversionary caution by—(a) varying or omitting any of the conditions;(a) 
118	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 6 – Cautions CHAPTER 4 – Other provisions Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(b) adding a condition.105 Effect of diversionary caution(1) Where a diversionary caution is given, criminal proceedings may be instituted against the offender for the offence in respect of which the caution was given if, but only if, the offender fails without reasonable excuse to comply with any of the conditions attached to the caution.(2) The document mentioned in section 99(2)(e) is admissible in such proceedings.(3) Where such proceedings are instituted, the diversionary caution ceases to have effect.106 Arrest for failure to comply(1) If a constable has reasonable grounds for believing that the offender has failed without reasonable excuse to comply with any of the conditions attached to a diversionary caution, the constable may arrest the offender without warrant.(2) A person arrested under this section must be—(a) charged with the offence in question, or(b) released without charge.(3) A person released without charge under subsection (2)(b) must be—(a) released on bail if—(i) the release is to enable a decision to be made as to whether the offender should be charged with the offence, and(ii) the pre-conditions for bail are satisfied, or(b) in any other case, released without bail (with or without any variation in the conditions attached to the caution).(4) Subsection (2) also applies in the case of—(a) a person who, having been released on bail under subsection (3)(a), returns to a police station to answer bail or is otherwise in police detention at a police station;(b) a person who, having been released on bail under section 30A of the 1984 Act (bail elsewhere than at police station) as applied by section 107 below, attends at a police station to answer bail or is otherwise in police detention at a police station;(c) a person who is arrested under section 30D or 46A of the 1984 Act (power of arrest for failure to answer to police bail) as applied by section 107 below.(a) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32) PART 6 – CautionsCHAPTER 4 – Other provisions Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
119
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(5) Where a person is released on bail under subsection (3)(a), the custody officer must inform the person that the release is to enable a decision to be made as to whether the person should be charged with the offence in question.(6) A person arrested under this section, or any other person in whose case subsection (2) applies, may be kept in police detention—(a) to enable the person to be dealt with in accordance with that subsection, or(b) where applicable, to enable the power under section 47(4A) of the 1984 Act (power of custody officer to appoint a different or additional time for answering to police bail), as applied by section 107 below, to be exercised.If the person is not in a fit state to be dealt with in that way, or to enable that power to be exercised, they may be kept in police detention until they are.(7) The power under subsection (6)(a) includes power to keep the person in police detention if it is necessary to do so for the purpose of investigating whether the person has failed, without reasonable excuse, to comply with any of the conditions attached to the diversionary caution.(8) Subsections (2) and (3) must be complied with as soon as practicable after the person arrested arrives at the police station or, in the case of a person arrested at the police station, as soon as practicable after the arrest.(9) Subsection (2) does not require a person who—(a) falls within subsection (4)(a) or (b), and(b) is in police detention in relation to a matter other than the diversionary caution,to be released if the person is liable to be kept in detention in relation to that other matter.(10) In subsection (3)(a)(ii), the reference to the pre-conditions for bail is to be read in accordance with section 50A of the 1984 Act.107 Application of Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984(1) In the case of a person arrested under section 106, the provisions of the 1984 Act specified in subsection (2) apply, with the modifications specified in subsection (3) and with such further modifications as are necessary, as they apply in the case of a person arrested for an offence.(2) The provisions are—(a) section 30 (arrest elsewhere than at police station);(b) sections 30A to 30D (bail elsewhere than at police station);(c) section 31 (arrest for further offence);(d) section 34(1) to (5E) (limitations on police detention);(e) section 36 (custody officers at police stations);(f) section 37(4) to (6C) (record of grounds for detention);(g) section 38 (duties of custody officer after charge);(a) 
120	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 6 – Cautions CHAPTER 4 – Other provisions Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(h) section 39 (responsibilities in relation to persons detained);(i) section 55A (x-rays and ultrasound scans).(3) The modifications are—(a) in section 30CA, omit subsections (4A) to (4D);(b) in section 30CA, in subsection (5), in paragraph (a) of the definition of “relevant officer”, for the reference to being involved in the investigation of the relevant offence substitute a reference to being involved—(i) in the investigation of the offence in respect of which the person was given the diversionary caution, or(ii) in investigating whether the person has failed, without reasonable excuse, to comply with any of the conditions attached to the diversionary caution;(c) in section 36(5) and (7), for the references to being involved in the investigation of an offence for which the person is in police detention substitute references to being involved—(i) in the investigation of the offence in respect of which the person was given the diversionary caution, or(ii) in investigating whether the person has failed, without reasonable excuse, to comply with any of the conditions attached to the diversionary caution;(d) in section 38(1)(a)(iii) and (iv), for “arrested for” substitute “charged with”;(e) in section 39(2) and (3), for the references to an offence substitute references to a failure to comply with conditions attached to the diversionary caution.(4) Section 40 of the 1984 Act (review of police detention) applies to a person in police detention by virtue of section 106 above as it applies to a person in police detention in connection with the investigation of an offence, but with the following modifications—(a) omit subsections (8) and (8A);(b) in subsection (9), for the reference to section 37(9) or 37D(5) substitute a reference to the second sentence of section 106(6) above.(5) The following provisions of the 1984 Act apply to a person released on bail under section 106(3)(a) above as they apply to a person released on bail under section 37 of that Act—(a) section 46A (power of arrest for failure to answer to police bail);(b) section 47 (bail after arrest), except subsections (4D) and (4E).(6) Section 54 of the 1984 Act (searches of detained persons) applies in the case of a person who falls within section 106(4) above and is detained in a police station under that section as it applies in the case of a person who falls within section 34(7) of that Act and is detained at a police station under section 37.(7) Section 54A of the 1984 Act (searches and examination to ascertain identity) applies with the following modifications in the case of a person who is detained in a police station under section 106 above—(a) in subsections (1)(a) and (12), after “as a person involved in the commission of an offence” insert “or as having failed to comply with any of the conditions attached to the person’s diversionary caution”;(a) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32) PART 6 – CautionsCHAPTER 4 – Other provisions Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
121
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesPROSPECTIVECommunity cautions108	Giving a community caution(1) An authorised person may give a community caution to a person aged 18 or over (“the offender”) in respect of an offence, other than an excluded offence, if the following requirements are met.(2) The requirements are that—(a) an authorised person or a prosecution authority decides that—(i) there is sufficient evidence to charge the offender with the offence, and(ii) a community caution should be given to the offender in respect of the offence;(b) the offender admits to having committed the offence;(c) the offender consents to being given the caution;(d) an authorised person—(i) explains the effect of the caution to the offender, and(ii) in particular, warns the offender of the effect of failure to comply with any of the conditions attached to the caution;(e) the offender signs a document which contains—(i) details of the offence,(ii) the offender’s admission to having committed the offence,(iii) the offender’s consent to being given the caution, and(iv) the conditions attached to the caution.(3) A community caution may not be given in respect of an offence committed before the coming into force of this section.(4) The power to give a community caution under subsection (1) is also subject to regulations under section 117 (restrictions on multiple use of cautions).Commencement InformationI186 S. 108 not in force at Royal Assent, see s. 208(1)
122	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 6 – Cautions CHAPTER 4 – Other provisions Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes109 Deciding on the conditions(1) The conditions attached to a community caution are to be decided upon by—(a) an authorised person, or(b) in a case where a prosecution authority has taken the decision that the caution should be given, the prosecution authority.(2) The conditions which may be attached to a community caution are those authorised by—(a) section 110 (rehabilitation and reparation conditions), and(b) section 111 (financial penalty conditions).(3) When deciding what conditions to attach to a community caution the authorised person or prosecution authority must—(a) make reasonable efforts, or ensure that reasonable efforts are or have been made, to obtain the views of any victim or victims of the offence, and(b) take those views into account.(4) The views referred to in subsection (3) include in particular views as to whether the offender should carry out any of the actions listed in the community remedy document.(5) Where it is the view of the victim or all the victims that the offender should carry out a particular action listed in the community remedy document, the authorised person or prosecution authority must attach that as a condition unless it seems to the authorised person or prosecution authority—(a) the action is not one that can be attached as a condition to a community caution, or(b) it would be inappropriate to do so.110 Rehabilitation and reparation conditions(1) Conditions with one or both of the objects in subsection (2) may be attached to a community caution.(2) The objects are—(a) facilitating the rehabilitation of the offender;(b) ensuring that the offender makes reparation for the offence.(3) The conditions which may be attached to a community caution for the objects referred to in subsection (2) include—(a) restrictive conditions,(b) unpaid work conditions, and(c) attendance conditions.(4) A restrictive condition is a condition requiring the offender—(a) not to meet or communicate with specified individuals;(b) not to be in or go to specified addresses, places or areas in the United Kingdom;(a) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32) PART 6 – CautionsCHAPTER 4 – Other provisions Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
123
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(c) not to carry out or participate in specified activities;(d) not to engage in specified conduct (which may include conduct constituting a criminal offence).(5) An unpaid work condition is a condition requiring the offender to carry out unpaid work of a specified description for a specified number of hours, which may not exceed 10.(6) An attendance condition is a condition requiring the offender to attend a specified place—(a) for a specified purpose, and(b) for a specified number of hours, which may not exceed 10 where the condition only has the object referred to in subsection (2)(b).(7) Where an attendance condition requires the offender to attend somewhere for the purpose of participating in any education or training, or receiving any other service, the attendance condition may also require the offender to pay for the reasonable cost of the provision of the education, training or service to the offender.(8) Regulations may amend subsection (5) or (6)(b) (or both) so as to substitute a different number of hours.(9) A condition authorised by this section may—(a) contain further details as to how it must be complied with (including the times at or between which something must or must not be done);(b) provide for those details to be supplied, after the giving of the caution, by a specified person or a person of a specified description.(10) A condition authorised by this section may not require a person to remain at their own or anyone else’s residence for any period of time.(11) In this section “specified” means specified in the caution.111 Financial penalty conditions(1) A condition requiring the offender to pay a financial penalty may be attached to a community caution with the object of punishing the offender.(2) The condition must specify—(a) the amount of the financial penalty,(b) the person to whom the financial penalty must be paid,(c) how it must or may be paid,(d) the date on or before which the penalty must be paid, and(e) the consequences of non-payment.(3) The amount specified under subsection (2)(a) must not exceed an amount prescribed in regulations.(1) 
124	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 6 – Cautions CHAPTER 4 – Other provisions Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(4) Where the person specified under subsection (2)(b) is not the designated officer for a magistrates’ court, once the penalty is paid to that person they must give it to such an officer.(5) The date specified under subsection (2)(d) must be the last day of the period of 28 days beginning with the day on which the caution is given.(6) If the financial penalty is not paid on or before the date specified under subsection (2) (d), the amount of the penalty required to be paid by the condition is increased by 50%.(7) Where subsection (6) applies, if the increased penalty is not paid within the period of 21 days beginning with the day after the date specified under subsection (2)(d), the amount of the increased penalty may be registered under section 112 for enforcement against the offender as a fine.112 Enforcement of financial penalties: registration(1) The chief officer of police may, in respect of any amount registrable under section 111(7), issue a certificate (“a registration certificate”)—(a) giving particulars of the financial penalty,(b) stating that the amount is registrable for enforcement against the offender as a fine, and(c) stating the name and last known address of the offender.(2) The chief officer of police issuing a registration certificate must cause it to be sent to the designated officer for the local justice area in which the offender appears to the chief officer to reside.(3) The designated officer for a local justice area in receipt of a registration certificate must—(a) register the amount for enforcement as a fine in that area by entering it in the register of a magistrates’ court acting for that area, or(b) if it appears to the designated officer that the offender does not reside in that area, cause the certificate to be sent to the person appearing to the officer to be the designated officer for the local justice area in which the offender resides.(4) A designated officer registering an amount under this section for enforcement as a fine must give the offender notice of the registration which—(a) specifies the amount registered, and(b) gives the information with respect to the financial penalty, and the authority for registration, that was included in the registration certificate.(5) If an amount is registered in a magistrates’ court as a result of this section, any enactment referring (in whatever terms) to a fine imposed, or other sum adjudged to be paid, on conviction by such a court applies as if the registered amount were a fine imposed by that court on the conviction of the offender on the date on which the amount was registered.(1) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32) PART 6 – CautionsCHAPTER 4 – Other provisions Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
125
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesCommencement InformationI190 S. 112 not in force at Royal Assent, see s. 208(1)113	Enforcement of financial penalties: court proceedings(1) This section applies where, in any proceedings for the enforcement of an amount registered under this section, the person against whom the proceedings are taken claims—(a) not to be the person to whom the community caution was given,(b) to have paid the amount that was required to be paid, or(c) to have a reasonable excuse for not paying.(2) The court may adjourn the proceedings, on one or more occasions, for the purpose of allowing the claim to be investigated, but must not adjourn for more than 28 days in total.(3) The court must accept a claim under subsection (1)(a) or (b) unless it is shown, on the balance of probabilities, that the claim is unfounded.(4) Where a court accepts a claim under subsection (1)(b), the condition of the caution by virtue of which the amount is required to be paid ceases to have effect.(5) In the case of a claim under subsection (1)(c), the court must accept the claim so far as relating to the facts claimed (leaving aside any question as to the reasonableness of the excuse), unless it is shown, on the balance of probabilities, that the claim so far as relating to those facts is unfounded.(6) Where a court accepts a claim under subsection (1)(c), the court may order that the condition of the caution by virtue of which the amount is required to be paid—(a) ceases to have effect, or(b) is varied so as to reduce the amount payable or to extend the time for payment (or both).Commencement InformationI191 S. 113 not in force at Royal Assent, see s. 208(1)114	Variation of conditions(1) An authorised person or prosecution authority may, with the consent of the offender, vary the conditions attached to a community caution by—(a) varying or omitting any of the conditions;(b) adding a condition.(2) See also section 115(2) (addition of financial penalty).Commencement InformationI192 S. 114 not in force at Royal Assent, see s. 208(1)
126	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 6 – Cautions CHAPTER 4 – Other provisions Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesGeneral116	Code of practice(1) The Secretary of State must prepare a code of practice in relation to diversionary and community cautions.(2) The code may, in particular, include provision as to—(a) the circumstances in which diversionary and community cautions may be given;(b) the procedure to be followed in connection with the giving of diversionary and community cautions;(c) the conditions which may be attached to diversionary and community cautions and the time for which they may have effect;(d) the category of constable or investigating officer by whom diversionary and community cautions may be given;(e) the persons whom a prosecution authority may authorise as authorised persons for the purposes of this Part;(f) the form which diversionary and community cautions are to take and the manner in which they are to be given and recorded;(g) the places where diversionary and community cautions may be given;(h) the provision which may be made in a condition under section 102(2)(b) or 111(2)(b);(i) the monitoring of compliance with conditions attached to diversionary and community cautions;(j) the exercise of the power of arrest conferred by section 106(1);(k) who is to decide how a person should be dealt with under section 106(2) and (3).(3) After preparing a draft of the code the Secretary of State—(a) must publish the draft,(b) must consider any representations made to the Secretary of State about the draft, and(c) may amend the draft accordingly,(a) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32) PART 6 – CautionsCHAPTER 4 – Other provisions Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
127
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesbut may not publish or amend the draft without the consent of the Attorney General.(4) After complying with subsection (3) the Secretary of State must lay the code before each House of Parliament.(5) After complying with subsection (4) the Secretary of State may bring the code into force by regulations.(6) The Secretary of State may from time to time revise a code of practice brought into force under this section.(7) Subsections (3) to (6) apply (with appropriate modifications) to a revised code as they apply to the original code.
128	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 6 – Cautions CHAPTER 4 – Other provisions Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesPROSPECTIVESupplementary119 Consequential amendments relating to Part 6Schedule 11 contains consequential amendments.120 Regulations under Part 6(1) Regulations under this Part are to be made by the Secretary of State by statutory instrument.(2) Regulations under this Part may make—(a) different provision for different purposes;(b) consequential, supplementary, incidental, transitional and transitory provision and savings.(3) A statutory instrument containing the regulations specified in subsection (4) (with or without other provision) may not be made unless a draft of the instrument has been laid before, and approved by resolution of, each House of Parliament.(4) The regulations referred to in subsection (3) are—(a) regulations under section 98(6)(b) or (c) (excluded offences);(b) regulations under section 101(8) or 110(8);(a) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32) PART 6 – CautionsCHAPTER 4 – Other provisions Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
129
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(c) the first regulations under section 102(3) or 111(3) (maximum amount of financial penalty);(d) any other regulations under section 102(3) or 111(3) which increase or decrease the maximum amount of a financial penalty by more than is necessary to reflect changes in the value of money;(e) regulations under section 116(5) (commencement of code);(f) regulations under section 117 (restriction on multiple cautions).(5) A statutory instrument containing regulations under this Part to which subsection (3) does not apply is subject to annulment in pursuance of a resolution of either House of Parliament.121 Interpretation of Part 6In this Part—“the 1984 Act” means the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984; “authorised person” has the meaning given by section 98(7);  “community remedy document” means the community remedy document (as revised from time to time) published under section 101 of the Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 for the police area where the offence in question was committed;“excluded offence” has the meaning given by section 98(6);  “indictable-only offence” means an offence which, if committed by an adult, is triable only on indictment;“investigating officer” means—(a) an officer of Revenue and Customs appointed in accordance with section 2(1) of the Commissioners for Revenue and Customs Act 2005, or(b) a person designated as a policing support officer or a policing support volunteer under section 38 of the Police Reform Act 2002;  “police detention” has the same meaning as in the 1984 Act (see section 118(2) of that Act);“prosecution authority” means—(a) the Attorney General;(b) the Director of Public Prosecutions;(c) the Director of the Serious Fraud Office;(d) the Secretary of State;(e) a person prescribed in regulations;  “victim”, in relation to an offence, means the particular person who appears to have been affected, or principally affected, by the offence.  
130	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 7 – Sentencing and releaseCHAPTER 1 – Custodial sentences Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesPART 7SENTENCING AND RELEASECHAPTER 1CUSTODIAL SENTENCESPenalties for offences involving children or vulnerable adults122 No commentary item could be found for this reference Penalty for cruelty to children(1) In section 1 of the Children and Young Persons Act 1933 (cruelty to persons under 16), in subsection (1)(a) (penalty on conviction on indictment), for “ten” substitute “14”.(2) Subsection (1) applies only in relation to offences committed on or after the day on which this section comes into force.123 Penalty for causing or allowing a child or vulnerable adult to die or suffer serious physical harm(1) Section 5 of the Domestic Violence, Crime and Victims Act 2004 (causing or allowing a child or vulnerable adult to die or suffer serious harm) is amended in accordance with subsections (2) and (3).(2) In subsection (7) (penalty in the case of a person’s death), for the words “liable on conviction on indictment” substitute “liable—(a) on conviction on indictment in England and Wales, to imprisonment for life or to a fine, or to both;(b) on conviction on indictment in Northern Ireland,”.(3) In subsection (8) (penalty in the case of serious physical harm), for the words “liable on conviction on indictment” substitute “liable—(a) on conviction on indictment in England and Wales, to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 14 years or to a fine, or to both;(b) on conviction on indictment in Northern Ireland,”.(a) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32) PART 7 – Sentencing and releaseCHAPTER 1 – Custodial sentences Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
131
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(4) Subsections (2) and (3) apply only in relation to offences where the unlawful act to which the offence relates is an act that occurs, or so much of such an act as occurs, on or after the day on which this section comes into force.(5) In Schedule 19 to the Sentencing Code (list of certain specified offences carrying maximum sentence on indictment of imprisonment for life), after paragraph 20 insert—“Domestic Violence, Crime and Victims Act 200420A	(1) An offence under section 5 of the Domestic Violence, Crime and Victims Act 2004 that meets the conditions in sub-paragraph (2).(2) The conditions are that—(a) the unlawful act to which the offence relates was an act that occurred, or so much of an act as occurred, on or after the day on which section 123 of the Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 came into force, and(b) the offender is liable on conviction on indictment to imprisonment for life.”Minimum sentences for particular offences124 Minimum sentences for particular offences(1) The Sentencing Code is amended in accordance with subsections (2) to (8).(2) In section 312 (minimum sentence for offences of threatening with weapon or bladed article)—(a) in subsection (2), for “The court” substitute “If the offence was committed before the day on which section 124 of the Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 came into force, the court”, and(b) after subsection (2) insert—“(2A) If the offence was committed on or after the day on which section 124 of the Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 came into force, the court must impose an appropriate custodial sentence unless the court is of the opinion that there are exceptional circumstances which—(a) relate to the offence or to the offender, and(b) justify not doing so.”(3) In section 313 (minimum sentence of 7 years for third class A drug trafficking offence)—(a) in subsection (2), for “The court” substitute “If the index offence was committed before the day on which section 124 of the Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 came into force, the court”,(a) 
132	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 7 – Sentencing and releaseCHAPTER 1 – Custodial sentences Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(b) after subsection (2) insert—“(2A) If the index offence was committed on or after the day on which section 124 of the Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 came into force, the court must impose an appropriate custodial sentence for a term of at least 7 years unless the court is of the opinion that there are exceptional circumstances which—(a) relate to any of the offences or to the offender, and(b) justify not doing so.”, and(c) in subsection (4)(b), after “subsection (2)” insert “or (2A)”.(4) In section 314 (minimum sentence of 3 years for third domestic burglary)—(a) in subsection (2), for “The court” substitute “If the index offence was committed before the day on which section 124 of the Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 came into force, the court”,(b) after subsection (2) insert—“(2A) If the index offence was committed on or after the day on which section 124 of the Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 came into force, the court must impose an appropriate custodial sentence for a term of at least 3 years unless the court is of the opinion that there are exceptional circumstances which—(a) relate to any of the offences or to the offender, and(b) justify not doing so.”, and(c) in subsection (4)(b), after “subsection (2)” insert “or (2A)”.(5) In section 315 (minimum sentence for repeat offence involving weapon or bladed article)—(a) in subsection (2), for “The court” substitute “If the index offence was committed before the day on which section 124 of the Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 came into force, the court”,(b) after subsection (2) insert—“(2A) If the index offence was committed on or after the day on which section 124 of the Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 came into force, the court must impose an appropriate custodial sentence unless the court is of the opinion that there are exceptional circumstances which—(a) relate to the offence, to the previous offence or to the offender, and(b) justify not doing so.”, and(c) in subsection (3), for “subsection (2)” substitute “subsections (2) and (2A)”.(6) In section 316(1)(a) (appeals where previous conviction set aside), after “subsection (2)” insert “or (2A)”.(7) In section 320 (determination of day when offence committed), after “311,” insert “312,”.(8) In section 399(c) (mandatory sentence requirements)—(a) in sub-paragraph (ii), after “312(2)” insert “or (2A)”,(b) in sub-paragraph (iii), after “313(2)” insert “or (2A)”,(c) in sub-paragraph (iv), after “314(2)” insert “or (2A)”, and(a) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32) PART 7 – Sentencing and releaseCHAPTER 1 – Custodial sentences Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
133
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(d) in sub-paragraph (v), after “315(2)” insert “or (2A)”.(9) In Schedule 22 to the Sentencing Act 2020—(a) in paragraph 66 (amendments of section 313 of the Code), after paragraph (a) insert—“(aa)	in subsection (2A), for “an appropriate custodial sentence” substitute “a sentence of imprisonment”;”, and(b) in paragraph 67 (amendments of section 314 of the Code), after paragraph (a) insert—“(aa)	in subsection (2A), for “an appropriate custodial sentence” substitute “a sentence of imprisonment”;”.(10) Schedule 12 contains amendments which are consequential on this section.(11) An amendment made by Schedule 12, so far as it has effect—(a) in relation to dealing with a person for an offence, or(b) in relation to a sentence passed for an offence,has effect only where the person committed the offence on or after the day on which the Schedule came into force.(12) For the purposes of subsection (11), where an offence is found to have been committed—(a) over a period of 2 or more days, or(b) at some time during a period of 2 or more days,it is to be taken to have been committed on the last of those days.Life sentences: time to be served125 Whole life order as starting point for premeditated child murderIn Schedule 21 to the Sentencing Code (minimum terms in mandatory life sentences), in paragraph 2(2), after paragraph (b) insert—“(ba)  the murder of a child involving a substantial degree of premeditation or planning, where the offence was committed on or after the day on which section 125 of the Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 came into force,”.126 Whole life orders for young adult offenders in exceptional cases(1) The Sentencing Code is amended as follows.(2) In section 321 (orders to be made on passing life sentence)—(1) 
134	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 7 – Sentencing and releaseCHAPTER 1 – Custodial sentences Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(a) in subsection (3)(a), for the words from “the offender” to “committed” substitute “the case is within subsection (3A) or (3B)”;(b) after subsection (3) insert—“(3A) A case is within this subsection if the offender was aged 21 or over when the offence was committed.(3B) A case is within this subsection if—(a) the offence was committed on or after the day on which section 126 of the Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 came into force, and(b) the offender was aged 18 or over but under 21 when the offence was committed.(3C) In a case within subsection (3B), the court may arrive at the opinion set out in subsection (3)(b) only if it considers that the seriousness of the offence, or combination of offences, is exceptionally high even by the standard of offences which would normally result in a whole life order in a case within subsection (3A).”(3) In section 322 (further provision about mandatory life sentences), in subsection (3) (a), after “321(3)” insert “or (3C)”.127 Starting points for murder committed when under 18In Schedule 21 to the Sentencing Code (minimum terms in mandatory life sentences), for paragraph 6 substitute—“5A  (1) This paragraph applies if—(a) the offender was aged under 18 when the offence was committed, and(b) the offender was convicted of the offence on or after the day on which section 127 of the Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 came into force.(2) The appropriate starting point, in determining the minimum term, is the period given in the entry in column 2, 3 or 4 of the following table that corresponds to—(a) the age of the offender when the offence was committed, as set out in column 1, and(b) the provision of this Schedule that would have supplied the appropriate starting point had the offender been aged 18 when the offence was committed, as set out in the headings to columns 2, 3 and 4.(a) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32) PART 7 – Sentencing and releaseCHAPTER 1 – Custodial sentences Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
135
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes1234Age ofStarting pointStarting pointStarting pointoffendersupplied bysupplied bysupplied bywhen offenceparagraphparagraphparagraph 5committed3(1) had4(1) hadhad offenderoffender been 18offender been 18been 181715 or 1614 or under27 years20 years15 years23 years17 years13 years14 years10 years8 years6    (1) This paragraph applies if—(a) the offender was aged under 18 when the offence was committed, and(b) the offender was convicted of the offence before the day on which section 127 of the Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 came into force.(2) The appropriate starting point, in determining the minimum term, is 12 years.”128 Sentences of detention during Her Majesty’s pleasure: review of minimum term(1) Before the italic heading above section 28 of the Crime (Sentences) Act 1997 insert—“Sentence of detention during Her Majesty’s pleasure: review of minimum term27A Sentence of detention during Her Majesty’s pleasure imposed on a person under 18: application for minimum term review(1) This section applies to a person who—(a) is serving a DHMP sentence, and(b) was under the age of 18 when sentenced;and such a person is referred to in this section as a “relevant young offender”.(2) A relevant young offender may make an application for a minimum term review to the Secretary of State after serving half of the minimum term.(3) An “application for a minimum term review” is an application made by a relevant young offender for a reduction in the minimum term.(4) Where a relevant young offender has made an application for a minimum term review under this section, the offender may only make a further such application if—(1) 
136	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 7 – Sentencing and releaseCHAPTER 1 – Custodial sentences Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(a) the period of 2 years beginning with the day on which the previous application was determined has expired, and(b) the offender is under the age of 18 on the day on which the further application is made.(5) Where the Secretary of State receives an application under this section, the Secretary of State must—(a) consider the application, and(b) unless the Secretary of State forms the view that the application is frivolous or vexatious, refer it to the High Court.(6) Where the Secretary of State decides not to refer the application to the High Court, the Secretary of State must give notice of that decision, and the reasons for it, to the relevant young offender.(7) If the relevant young offender makes representations or provides further evidence in support of the application before the end of the period of 4 weeks beginning with the day on which the notice under subsection (6) is given, the Secretary of State must consider the representations or evidence and—(a) if the Secretary of State is no longer of the view mentioned in subsection (5)(b), refer the application to the High Court, or(b) give notice to the offender confirming the decision not to refer the application.(8) In this section—  “DHMP sentence” means a sentence of detention during Her Majesty’s pleasure imposed (whether before or after this section comes into force) under a provision listed in column 1 of the table in subsection (9);  “minimum term”, in relation to a person serving a DHMP sentence, means the part of the sentence specified—(a) in the minimum term order made in respect of the sentence, or(b) where one or more reduction orders have been made under section 27B in respect of the sentence, in the most recent of those orders;  “minimum term order”, in relation to a DHMP sentence, means the order made under the provision listed in column 2 of the table in subsection (9) that corresponds to the entry in column 1 that relates to the sentence.(9) The table is as follows—
Provision under which DHMP sentence imposedSection 259 of the Sentencing CodeSection 90 of the Powers of Criminal Courts (Sentencing) Act 2000Section 218 of the Armed Forces Act 2006 
Provision under which minimum term order madeSection 322 of the Sentencing CodeSection 82A of the Powers of Criminal Courts (Sentencing) Act 2000 or section 269 of the Criminal Justice Act 2003Section 269 of the Criminal Justice Act 2003 or section 322 of the Sentencing Code.
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32) PART 7 – Sentencing and releaseCHAPTER 1 – Custodial sentences Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
137
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(10) For the purposes of subsection (4), an application for a minimum term review is determined—(a) when the court makes a reduction order or a decision confirming the minimum term (see section 27B), or(b) in a case where the application is not referred to the court, when the Secretary of State gives the relevant young offender notice in relation to the application under subsection (6).(11) There is no right for any person who is serving a DHMP sentence to request a review of the minimum term other than that conferred by this section.27B Power of High Court to reduce minimum term(1) This section applies where the Secretary of State refers an application for a minimum term review made by a relevant young offender under section 27A to the High Court.(2) The court may—(a) make a reduction order in relation to relevant young offender, or(b) confirm the minimum term in respect of the offender’s DHMP sentence,and a decision of the court under this subsection is final.(3) A reduction order is an order that the relevant young offender’s minimum term is to be reduced to such part of the offender’s DHMP sentence as the court considers appropriate and is specified in the reduction order.(4) In deciding whether to make a reduction order, the court must, in particular, take into account any evidence—(a) that the relevant young offender’s rehabilitation has been exceptional;(b) that the continued detention or imprisonment of the offender for the remainder of the minimum term is likely to give rise to a serious risk to the welfare or continued rehabilitation of the offender which cannot be eliminated or mitigated to a significant degree.(5) In this section “DHMP sentence”, “minimum term” and “relevant young offender” have the same meaning as in section 27A.”(2) In section 28 of that Act (duty to release certain life prisoners), in subsection (1A), for the words from “the part of” to the end substitute—“(a)  the part of the sentence specified in the minimum term order, or(b) in a case where one or more reduction orders has been made in relation to the prisoner (see section 27B), the part of the sentence specified in the most recent of those orders.”(3) A pre-commencement application—(a) is to be treated for the purposes of subsection (4) of section 27A of the Crime (Sentences) Act 1997 as if it was made under that section if, at the time the relevant young offender made the application, they had served at least half of the minimum term;(a) 
138	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 7 – Sentencing and releaseCHAPTER 1 – Custodial sentences Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(b) if not determined before the day on which this section comes into force, is to be dealt with in the manner in which it would have been dealt with immediately before this section comes into force.(4) In this section—  “minimum term”, in relation to a relevant young offender, means the part of the offender’s DHMP sentence specified in the minimum term order made in respect of the sentence (and for these purposes “DHMP sentence” and “minimum term order” have same meanings as in that section 27A);  “pre-commencement application” means an application by a relevant young offender for a review of the minimum term that was made to the Secretary of State before the day on which this section comes into force;  “relevant young offender” has the same meaning as in section 27A of the Crime (Sentences) Act 1997.129 Life sentence not fixed by law: minimum term(1) In section 323 of the Sentencing Code (minimum term order for life sentence not fixed by law)—(a) after subsection (1) insert—“(1A) The starting point, in determining the minimum term, is the relevant portion of the notional determinate sentence.(1B) The “notional determinate sentence”, in relation to a life sentence, is the custodial sentence that the court would have imposed if the court had not imposed the life sentence.(1C) The “relevant portion” of the notional determinate sentence is—(a) where that sentence is within section 247A(2A) of the Criminal Justice Act 2003 (terrorist prisoners not entitled to early release), the term that the court would have determined as the appropriate custodial term (within the meaning given by subsection (8) of that section);(b) where that sentence is a sentence under section 252A, 254, 265, 266, 278 or 279 (and is not within paragraph (a)), two- thirds of the term that the court would have determined as the appropriate custodial term under that section;(c) where that sentence is any other custodial sentence, two- thirds of the term of the sentence.”;(b) in subsection (2)—(i) for the words before paragraph (a), substitute “The minimum term must be the starting point adjusted as the court considers appropriate, taking into account—”;(ii) omit paragraph (b) (but not the final “and”).(2) In section 261A(3) of the Armed Forces Act 2006 (life sentences: further provision), before paragraph (a) insert—(1) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32) PART 7 – Sentencing and releaseCHAPTER 1 – Custodial sentences Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
139
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes“(za)	subsection (1C)(b) has effect as if for “section 252A, 254, 265, 266, 278 or 279” there were substituted—(i) section 224A or 224B of the Armed Forces Act 2006, or(ii) section 254, 266, 278 or 279 passed as a result of section 219A, 219ZA or 221A of that Act,”.(3) In the Sentencing Act 2020—(a) in section 61 (sentencing guidelines for life sentences etc)—(i) for subsection (6), for the words from “the notional” to “made under” substitute “the notional determinate sentence within the meaning of”;(ii) omit subsection (7);(b) omit the following (which concern the commencement of paragraph 85 of Schedule 22)—(i) section 407(1)(b)(ii) (but not the final “or”);(ii) section 417(8);(c) in Schedule 22 (prospective amendments of the Sentencing Code)—(i) in paragraph 68A (amendments of section 323 of the Sentencing Code in relation to prospective abolition of detention in young offender institution), before sub-paragraph (a) insert—“(za)  in subsection (1C)(b), omit “265, 266,”;(ii) omit paragraph 85 (prospective amendments of section 323);(d) in paragraph 20A of Schedule 26 (amendments of section 261A of Armed Forces Act 2006 in relation to prospective abolition of detention in young offender institution), before sub-paragraph (a) insert—“(za)  in paragraph (za)—(i) in the words before sub-paragraph (i), omit “265, 266,”;(ii) in sub-paragraph (ii), omit “266,”.”Release on licence130 Increase in requisite custodial period for certain violent or sexual offenders(1) The Criminal Justice Act 2003 is amended in accordance with subsections (2) to (8).(2) In section 244 (general duty to release prisoners)—(a) in the heading, at the end insert “not subject to special provision for release”;(b) in subsection (1), after “243A,” insert “244ZA,”.(3) After section 244 insert—(1) 
140	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 7 – Sentencing and releaseCHAPTER 1 – Custodial sentences Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes“244ZA Release on licence of certain violent or sexual offenders(1) As soon as a fixed-term prisoner to whom this section applies has served the requisite custodial period for the purposes of this section, it is the duty of the Secretary of State to release the prisoner on licence under this section.(2) This section applies to a prisoner who—(a) is serving a fixed-term sentence within subsection (4), (5) or (6),(b) is not a prisoner to whom section 244A, 246A or 247A applies, and(c) has not been released on licence (provision for the release of persons recalled under section 254 being made by sections 255B and 255C).(3) Subsection (1) does not apply if—(a) the prisoner’s case has been referred to the Board under section 244ZB, or(b) a notice given to the prisoner under subsection (4) of that section is in force.(4) A fixed-term sentence is within this subsection if it—(a) is a sentence of—(i) imprisonment, or(ii) detention under section 96 of the PCC(S)A 2000 or section 262 of the Sentencing Code,(b) is for a term of 7 years or more,(c) was imposed on or after 1 April 2020, and(d) was imposed in respect of an offence—(i) that is specified in Part 1 or 2 of Schedule 15, and(ii) for which a sentence of life imprisonment could have been imposed (in the case of an offender aged 21 or over) at the time when the actual sentence was imposed.(5) A fixed-term sentence is within this subsection if it—(a) is a sentence of imprisonment or a sentence of detention under section 262 of the Sentencing Code,(b) is for a term of at least 4 years but less than 7 years,(c) was imposed on or after the day on which section 130 of the Police,Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 came into force, and(d) was imposed in respect of an offence within subsection (7).(6) A fixed-term sentence is within this subsection if it—(a) is a sentence of detention under section 250 of the Sentencing Code,(b) is for a term of 7 years or more,(c) was imposed on or after the day on which section 130 of the Police,Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 came into force, and(d) was imposed in respect of an offence within subsection (7).(7) An offence is within this subsection if—(a) it is specified in any of the following paragraphs of Part 1 of Schedule 15—(i) paragraph 1 (manslaughter);(i) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32) PART 7 – Sentencing and releaseCHAPTER 1 – Custodial sentences Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
141
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(ii) paragraph 4 (soliciting murder);(iii) paragraph 6 (wounding with intent to cause grievous bodily harm);(iv) paragraph 64 (ancillary offences), so far as it relates to an offence listed in paragraph 1, 4 or 6;(v) paragraph 65 (inchoate offences in relation to murder), or(b) it is an offence—(i) that is specified in Part 2 of that Schedule (sexual offences), and(ii) for which a sentence of life imprisonment could have been imposed (in the case of an offender aged 21 or over) at the time when the actual sentence was imposed.(8) For the purposes of this section “the requisite custodial period” means—(a) in relation to a prisoner serving one sentence, two-thirds of the prisoner’s sentence, and(b) in relation to a prisoner serving two or more concurrent or consecutive sentences, the period determined under sections 263(2) and 264(2B) or (2E).”(4) In section 260(5) (powers and duties of Secretary of State that continue to apply to prisoner removed from prison pending deportation), after “244,” insert “244ZA,”.(5) In section 261(5)(b) (application of release provisions to returning deported prisoner), after “244,” insert “244ZA,”.(6) In section 264(6) (consecutive terms of imprisonment: meaning of custodial period), after paragraph (ca) (inserted by section 131) (but before the final “and”), insert—“(cb)	in relation to a sentence in respect of which section 244ZA applies to the offender, two-thirds of the sentence,”.(7) In section 268(1A) (meaning of “requisite custodial period” in Chapter 6 of Part 12), in paragraph (d), for “or section 244” substitute “, 244 or 244ZA”.(8) In Schedule 15 (specified offences for certain purposes to do with release of offenders)—(a) in the heading, for “section” substitute “sections 244ZA and”;(b) in the shoulder reference, for “Section” substitute “Sections 244ZA and”.(9) The Release of Prisoners (Alteration of Relevant Proportion of Sentence) Order 2020 (S.I. 2020/158) is revoked.131 Increase in requisite custodial period for certain other offenders of particular concern(1) The Criminal Justice Act 2003 is amended as follows.(1) 
142	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 7 – Sentencing and releaseCHAPTER 1 – Custodial sentences Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(2) In section 244A(6) (release on licence of prisoners serving sentence under section 278 of the Sentencing Code etc: interpretation), in the definition of “the requisite custodial period”—(a) in paragraph (a), after “one sentence” insert “imposed before the day on which section 131 of the Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 came into force”;(b) after that paragraph (but before the final “and”) insert—“(aa) in relation to a person serving one sentence imposed on or after that day, two-thirds of the appropriate custodial term,”.(3) In section 264(6) (consecutive terms of imprisonment: meaning of custodial period)—(a) in paragraph (c), after “Code” insert “before the day on which section 131 of the Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 came into force”;(b) after that paragraph (but before the final “and”) insert—“(ca) in relation to a sentence imposed under section 265 or 278 of the Sentencing Code on or after the day on which section 131 of the Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 came into force, two-thirds of the appropriate custodial term determined by the court under that section,”.132 Power to refer high-risk offenders to Parole Board in place of automatic release(1) The Criminal Justice Act 2003 is amended in accordance with subsections (2) to (10).(2) In section 243A (release of prisoners serving sentences of less than 12 months), after subsection (2) insert—“(2A) Subsection (2) does not apply if—(a) the prisoner’s case has been referred to the Board under section 244ZB, or(b) a notice given to the prisoner under subsection (4) of that section is in force.”(3) In section 244 (general duty to release prisoners), after subsection (1) insert— “(1ZA) Subsection (1) does not apply if—(a) the prisoner’s case has been referred to the Board under section 244ZB, or(b) a notice given to the prisoner under subsection (4) of that section is in force.”(4) After section 244 insert—“244ZB Referral of high-risk offenders to Parole Board in place of automatic release(1) This section applies to a prisoner who—(1) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32) PART 7 – Sentencing and releaseCHAPTER 1 – Custodial sentences Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
143
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(a) would (but for anything done under this section and ignoring any possibility of release under section 246 or 248) be, or become, entitled to be released on licence under section 243A(2), 244(1) or 244ZA(1), and(b) is (or will be) aged 18 or over on the first day on which the prisoner would be so entitled.(2) For the purposes of this section, the Secretary of State is of the requisite opinion if the Secretary of State believes on reasonable grounds that the prisoner would, if released, pose a significant risk to members of the public of serious harm occasioned by the commission of any of the following offences—(a) murder;(b) specified offences, within the meaning of section 306 of the Sentencing Code.(3) If the Secretary of State is of the requisite opinion, the Secretary of State may refer the prisoner’s case to the Board.(4) Before referring the prisoner’s case to the Board, the Secretary of State must notify the prisoner in writing of the Secretary of State’s intention to do so (and the reference may be made only if the notice is in force).(5) A notice given under subsection (4) must take effect before the prisoner becomes entitled as mentioned in subsection (1)(a).(6) A notice given under subsection (4) must explain—(a) the effect of the notice (including its effect under section 243A(2A), 244(1ZA) or 244ZA(3)),(b) why the Secretary of State is of the requisite opinion, and(c) the prisoner’s right to make representations (see subsection (12)).(7) A notice given under subsection (4)—(a) takes effect at whichever is the earlier of—(i) the time when it is received by the prisoner, and(ii) the time when it would ordinarily be received by the prisoner, and(b) remains in force until—(i) the Secretary of State refers the prisoner’s case to the Board under this section, or(ii) the notice is revoked.(8) The Secretary of State—(a) may revoke a notice given under subsection (4), and(b) must do so if the Secretary of State is no longer of the requisite opinion.(9) If a notice given under subsection (4) is in force and the prisoner would but for the notice have become entitled as mentioned in subsection (1)(a)—(a) the prisoner may apply to the High Court on the ground that the prisoner’s release has been delayed by the notice for longer than is reasonably necessary in order for the Secretary of State to complete the referral of the prisoner’s case to the Board, and(a) 
144	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 7 – Sentencing and releaseCHAPTER 1 – Custodial sentences Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(b) the High Court, if satisfied that that ground is made out, must by order revoke the notice.(10) At any time before the Board disposes of a reference under this section, the Secretary of State—(a) may rescind the reference, and(b) must do so if the Secretary of State is no longer of the requisite opinion.(11) If the reference is rescinded, the prisoner is no longer to be treated as one whose case has been referred to the Board under this section (but this does not have the effect of reviving the notice under subsection (4)).(12) The prisoner may make representations to the Secretary of State about the referral, or proposed referral, of the prisoner’s case at any time after being notified under subsection (4) and before the Board disposes of any ensuing reference under this section.But the Secretary of State is not required to delay the referral of the prisoner’s case in order to give an opportunity for such representations to be made.244ZC Proceedings following reference under section 244ZB(1) This section applies to a prisoner whose case has been referred to the Parole Board under section 244ZB.(2) If, in disposing of that reference or any subsequent reference of the prisoner’s case to the Board under this subsection, the Board does not direct the prisoner’s release, it is the duty of the Secretary of State to refer the prisoner’s case to the Board again no later than the first anniversary of the disposal.(3) It is the duty of the Secretary of State to release the prisoner on licence as soon as—(a) the prisoner has served the requisite custodial period, and(b) the Board has directed the release of the prisoner under this section.(4) The Board must not give a direction under subsection (3) in disposing of the reference under section 244ZB unless the Board is satisfied that it is no longer necessary for the protection of the public that the prisoner should be confined.(5) The Board must not subsequently give a direction under subsection (3) unless—(a) the Secretary of State has referred the prisoner’s case to the Board under subsection (2), and(b) the Board is satisfied that it is no longer necessary for the protection of the public that the prisoner should be confined.(6) For the purposes of this section, the “requisite custodial period” means the period ending with the day on which the prisoner would have become entitled as mentioned in section 244ZB(1)(a).”(5) In section 246(4) (exceptions from power to release early subject to curfew), after paragraph (f) insert—“(fa)	the prisoner’s case has been referred to the Board under section 244ZB,
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32) PART 7 – Sentencing and releaseCHAPTER 1 – Custodial sentences Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
145
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(fb)  a notice given to the prisoner under subsection (4) of that section is in force,”.(6) In section 255A(2) (duty to consider suitability for automatic release following recall of certain prisoners) (as amended by the Counter-Terrorism and Sentencing Act 2021), for “or a serious terrorism prisoner” substitute “, a serious terrorism prisoner or a prisoner whose case was referred to the Board under section 244ZB”.(7) In section 255C(1) (prisoners whose release after recall is not automatic), for the words from “who” to the end substitute “—(a) whose suitability for automatic release does not have to be considered under section 255A(2), or(b) who is not considered suitable for automatic release.”(8) In section 260(5) (powers and duties of Secretary of State that continue to apply to prisoner removed from prison pending deportation), after “244,” insert “244ZB,”.(9) In section 261(5)(b) (application of release provisions to returning deported prisoner), after “244,” insert “244ZC,”.(10) In section 268(1A) (meaning of “requisite custodial period” in Chapter 6 of Part 12), after paragraph (c) insert—“(ca) in relation to a prisoner whose case has been referred to the Parole Board under section 244ZB, the requisite custodial period for the purposes of section 244ZC;”.(11) In Schedule 1 to the Crime (Sentences) Act 1997—(a) in paragraph 8(2)(a) (provisions relating to release continuing to apply to prisoner transferred from England and Wales to Scotland), for “, 244,” substitute “to”;(b) in paragraph 9(2)(a) (provisions relating to release continuing to apply to prisoner transferred from England and Wales to Northern Ireland), for “, 244,” substitute “to”.(12) In section 128 of the Legal Aid, Sentencing and Punishment of Offenders Act 2012 (power to alter test for release on licence at direction of Parole Board)—(a) in subsection (2), after paragraph (b) insert—“(bza) a prisoner whose case has been referred to the Parole Board under section 244ZB of the Criminal Justice Act 2003 (power to refer to Parole Board in place of automatic release),”;(b) in subsection (3), before paragraph (ab) insert—“(aaa) amend section 244ZC of the Criminal Justice Act 2003 (proceedings following reference under section 244ZB of that Act),”.
146	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 7 – Sentencing and releaseCHAPTER 1 – Custodial sentences Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes133 Power to make provision for reconsideration and setting aside of Parole Board decisionsIn section 239 of the Criminal Justice Act 2003 (the Parole Board), after subsection (5) insert—“(5A) Rules under subsection (5) may, in particular, make provision—(a) requiring or permitting the Board to make provisional decisions;(b) about the circumstances—(i) in which the Board must or may reconsider such decisions;(ii) in which such decisions become final;(c) conferring power on the Board to set aside a decision or direction that is within subsection (5B),and any such provision may relate to cases referred to the Board under this Chapter or under Chapter 2 of Part 2 of the 1997 Act.(5B) The following are within this subsection—(a) a direction given by the Board for, or a decision made by it not to direct, the release of a prisoner which the Board determines it would not have given or made but for an error of law or fact, or(b) a direction given by the Board for the release of a prisoner which the Board determines it would not have given if—(i) information that was not available to the Board when the direction was given had been so available, or(ii) a change in circumstances relating to the prisoner that occurred after the direction was given had occurred before it was given.(5C) Provision made by virtue of subsection (5A)(c)—(a) may not confer power on the Board to set aside a direction for the release of a prisoner at any time when the prisoner has already been released pursuant to that direction, but(b) may make provision for the suspension of any requirement under this Chapter or under Chapter 2 of Part 2 of the 1997 Act for the Secretary of State to give effect to a direction of the Board to release a prisoner, pending consideration by the Board as to whether to set it aside.”134 Responsibility for setting licence conditions for fixed-term prisoners(1) Section 250 of the Criminal Justice Act 2003 (licence conditions for fixed-term prisoners) is amended in accordance with subsections (2) and (3).(2) For subsections (5A) to (5B) substitute— “(5A) The Secretary of State must not—(a) include a condition referred to in subsection (4)(b)(ii) in a licence within subsection (5B), either on release or subsequently, or(a) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32) PART 7 – Sentencing and releaseCHAPTER 1 – Custodial sentences Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
147
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(b) vary or cancel any such condition included in such a licence,unless the Board directs the Secretary of State to do so (and must, if the Board so directs, include, vary or cancel such a condition).(5B) A licence is within this subsection if it is granted to a relevant prisoner—(a) on their initial release in a case where that release is at the direction of the Board, or(b) on their release after recall to prison in a case where that release is at the direction of the Board (see sections 255B(5), 255C(5) and 256A(5)).(5C) In subsection (5B), “relevant prisoner” means a prisoner to whom section 244ZC, 244A, 246A, 247 or 247A applies (or applied) for the purposes of their initial release.”(3) Omit subsection (9).(4) Subsection (5) applies to any condition of a licence that is in force immediately before commencement if—(a) the inclusion of the condition required a direction of the Board, but(b) no such direction was given.(5) The condition is to be treated, for the purposes of any time after commencement, as it if was included in the licence at the direction of the Board.(6) Nothing in this section except subsection (5) affects the validity of any condition included in a licence before commencement.(7) In this section—“the Board” means the Parole Board;“commencement” means the coming into force of this section;  “licence” means a licence under Chapter 6 of Part 12 of the Criminal Justice Act 2003.135 Repeal of uncommenced provision for establishment of recall adjudicatorsIn the Criminal Justice and Courts Act 2015, omit the following (which make provision for recall adjudicators that has not been commenced)—(a) sections 8 to 10, and(b) Schedule 3.
148	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 7 – Sentencing and releaseCHAPTER 1 – Custodial sentences Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes136 Release at direction of Parole Board after recall: fixed-term prisoners(1) The Criminal Justice Act 2003 is amended as follows.(2) In section 255B (automatic release), after subsection (4) insert—“(4A) The Board must not give a direction for P’s release on a reference under subsection (4) unless the Board is satisfied that it is not necessary for the protection of the public that P should remain in prison until the end of the period mentioned in subsection (1)(b).”(3) In section 255C (fixed-term prisoners not suitable for automatic release), after subsection (4) insert—“(4A) The Board must not give a direction for P’s release on a reference under subsection (4) unless the Board is satisfied that it is not necessary for the protection of the public that P should remain in prison.”(4) Omit section 256 (power of Board to fix date for future release).(5) In section 256A (further review)—(a) for subsection (1) substitute—“(1) This section applies to a person if—(a) there has been a previous reference of the person’s case to the Board under section 255C(4) or this section, and(b) the person has not been released.(1A) The Secretary of State must refer the person’s case back to the Board not later than the first anniversary of the most recent determination by the Board not to release the person (the “review date”).(1B) Subsection (1A) does not apply where the review date is 13 months or less before the date on which the person is required to be released by the Secretary of State.”;(b) in subsection (2), for “that anniversary” substitute “the review date”;(c) in subsection (3), for “a person’s” substitute “the person’s”;(d) for subsections (4) and (5) substitute—“(4) The Board must not give a direction for a person’s release on a reference under subsection (1A) or (2) unless the Board is satisfied that it is not necessary for the protection of the public that the person should remain in prison.(5) Where on a reference under subsection (1A) or (2) the Board directs a person’s release on licence under this Chapter, the Secretary of State must give effect to the direction.”(6) After section 256A insert—“256AZA Release after recall where further sentence being served(1) This section applies where a person (“the offender”) is serving two or more terms of imprisonment.(1) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32) PART 7 – Sentencing and releaseCHAPTER 1 – Custodial sentences Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
149
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(2) Nothing in sections 255A to 256A requires the Secretary of State to release the offender in respect of any of the terms unless and until the Secretary of State is required to release the offender in respect of each of the others.(3) Nothing in sections 255A to 256A requires the Secretary of State to refer the offender’s case to the Board in respect of any of the terms unless and until the Secretary of State is required either—(a) to refer the offender’s case to the Board, or  (b) to release the offender, in respect of each of the others.(4) If the offender is released on licence under section 255B, 255C or 256A, the offender is to be on licence—(a) until the last date on which the offender is required to be on licence in respect of any of the terms, and(b) subject to such conditions as are required by this Chapter in respect of any of the sentences.(5) This section applies to a determinate sentence of detention under any of the following provisions as it applies to a term of imprisonment—(a) section 91 or 96 of the PCC(S)A 2000;(b) section 250, 252A, 254, 262, 265, 266 or 268A of the Sentencing Code;(c) section 226A, 226B, 227, 228 or 236A of this Act.”(7) In Schedule 20A (application of Chapter 6 of Part 12 of the 2003 Act to pre-4 April 2005 cases), omit paragraph 6(5) (certain determinations to be treated as made under section 256(1)).137 Power to change test for release of fixed-term prisoners following recall(1) The Criminal Justice Act 2003 is amended as follows.(2) After section 256AZA insert—“256AZB Power to change test for release following recall(1) The Secretary of State may by order change—(a) the test to be applied by the Secretary of State in deciding under section 255A whether a person is suitable for automatic release;(b) the test to be applied by the Secretary of State in deciding whether to release a person under section 255B(2) or 255C(2);(c) the test to be applied by the Board in deciding whether to give a direction for a person’s release when determining a reference under section 255B(4), 255C(4) or 256A(1A) or (2).(a) 
150	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 7 – Sentencing and releaseCHAPTER 1 – Custodial sentences Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(2) An order under subsection (1) may in particular—(a) apply to a person recalled before the day on which the order comes into force (as well as to a person recalled on or after that day);(b) amend this Chapter.”(3) In section 330(5)(a) (orders subject to affirmative procedure), at the appropriate place insert—“section 256AZB,”.138 Imprisonment for public protection etc: duty to refer person released on licence to Parole Board(1) Section 31A of the Crime (Sentences) Act 1997 (imprisonment or detention for public protection: termination of licences) is amended in accordance with subsections (2) to (6).(2) In subsection (2)(a), after “Chapter” insert “(whether or not the prisoner has subsequently been recalled to prison under section 32)”.(3) For subsection (3) substitute—“(3) Where—(a) the prisoner has been released on licence under this Chapter (whether or not the prisoner has subsequently been recalled to prison under section 32);(b) the qualifying period has expired; and(c) if the Secretary of State has made a previous reference of the prisoner’s case under this subsection, the period of twelve months beginning with the day of the disposal of that reference has expired,the Secretary of State must refer the prisoner’s case to the Parole Board under this subsection.”(4) In subsection (4)—(a) in the words before paragraph (a), for “an application” substitute “a reference”, and(b) in paragraph (b), for “application” substitute “reference”.(5) After subsection (4) insert—“(4A) A reference under subsection (3) must be made, and a reference under that subsection must be determined by the Parole Board under subsection (4), even if at the time of the reference or determination the prisoner is in prison having been recalled under section 32.(4B) If at the time of the determination the prisoner is in prison having been recalled under section 32—
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32) PART 7 – Sentencing and releaseCHAPTER 1 – Custodial sentences Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
151
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(a) subsection (2) does not apply, and(b) subsection (4)(a) has effect as if it required the Parole Board—(i) to determine whether it is satisfied that it is not necessary for the protection of the public for the prisoner, when released, to be released on licence in respect of the preventative sentence or sentences, and(ii) if it is so satisfied, to direct the Secretary of State accordingly.(4C) Where the Parole Board gives a direction under subsection (4B)(b)(ii)—(a) if at any time the Board directs the prisoner’s release under section 28, that section has effect in relation to the prisoner as if, in subsection (5), for “to release him on licence” there were substituted “to release the prisoner unconditionally”, and(b) if at any time the Board directs the prisoner’s release under section 32, that section has effect in relation to the prisoner as if, in subsection (5), for “immediate release on licence” there were substituted “immediate unconditional release”.”(6) In subsection (5), in the definition of “the qualifying period”, after “on licence” insert “(whether or not the prisoner has subsequently been recalled to prison under section 32)”.(7) Subsection (8) applies to an application made by a person under section 31A(3) of the Crime (Sentences) Act 1997 before this section comes into force.(8) If the application has not been determined when this section comes into force, subsections (4) to (4C) of section 31A of the Crime (Sentences) Act 1997 apply in relation to it as if it were a reference of the person’s case by the Secretary of State to the Parole Board under subsection (3) of that section.(9) Subsection (10) applies if a person remains on licence under Chapter 2 of Part 2 of the Crime (Sentences) Act 1997, or remains subject to release on licence under that Chapter, following—(a) the disposal before this section comes into force of the person’s application to the Parole Board under section 31A(3) of that Act, or(b) the disposal under subsection (4) of section 31A of that Act, as it has effect by virtue of subsection (8) of this section, of the person’s application to the Parole Board under subsection (3) of that section.(10) Subsection (3) of section 31A of the Crime (Sentences) Act 1997 applies in relation to the person as if the application had been a reference of the person’s case by the Secretary of State to the Parole Board under that subsection.139 Release at direction of Parole Board: timing(1) In the Crime (Sentences) Act 1997—(a) in section 32(5) (duty to release life prisoner after recall), omit “immediate”;(b) after section 32ZA insert—(a) 
152	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 7 – Sentencing and releaseCHAPTER 1 – Custodial sentences Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes“Release at the direction of Parole Board32ZB Release at direction of Parole Board: timing(1) This section applies where the Parole Board directs the release of a life prisoner under section 28 or 32.(2) The Secretary of State must give effect to the direction of the Parole Board as soon as is reasonably practicable in all the circumstances including, in particular, the need to make arrangements in connection with any conditions that are to be included in the life prisoner’s licence under this Chapter.(3) The duty under subsection (2) is subject to provision made pursuant to section 239(5C)(b) of the Criminal Justice Act 2003 (provision in Parole Board rules in relation to setting aside of release directions).”(2) In the Criminal Justice Act 2003—(a) in section 255B(5) (automatic release after recall), omit “immediate”;(b) in section 255C(5) (release after recall of fixed-term prisoner not suitable for automatic release), omit “immediate”;(c) after section 256AZB insert—“Release at the direction of the Board256AZC Release at direction of Parole Board: timing(1) This section applies where the Board directs the release of a person on licence under this Chapter.(2) The Secretary of State must give effect to the direction of the Parole Board as soon as is reasonably practicable in all the circumstances including, in particular, the need to make arrangements in connection with any conditions that are to be included in the person’s licence under this Chapter.(3) The duty under subsection (2) is subject to provision made pursuant to section 239(5C)(b).”
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32) PART 7 – Sentencing and releaseCHAPTER 1 – Custodial sentences Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
153
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesDriving disqualification: extension in connection with custodial sentence140 Extension of driving disqualification where custodial sentence imposed: England and Wales(1) In section 35A(4) of the Road Traffic Offenders Act 1988 (extension of driving disqualification period where custodial sentence also imposed)—(a) in paragraph (e), after “custodial sentence,” insert “but the sentence is not within section 247A(2A) of the Criminal Justice Act 2003 (sentences for terrorist offenders in respect of which no early release possible),”;(b) in paragraph (f), after “custodial sentence,” insert “but the sentence is not within section 247A(2A) of the Criminal Justice Act 2003,”;(c) after paragraph (f) insert—“(fza)  in a case that would fall within paragraph (e) or (f) but for the fact that the custodial sentence falls within section 247A(2A) of the Criminal Justice Act 2003, a period equal to the term imposed under section 266(a) or 279(a) or (as the case may be) section 254(a) of the Sentencing Code;”;(d) in paragraph (fa)—(i) after “under section” insert “252A,”;(ii) for “half” substitute “two-thirds”;(iii) after “pursuant to section” insert “252A(4)(a),”;(e) after paragraph (fa) insert—“(fb) in the case of a sentence under section 268A or 282A of that Code (serious terrorism sentences), a period equal to the term imposed by the court pursuant to section 268C(2) or 282C(2) of that Code;(fc)  in the case of a sentence in respect of which section 244ZA of the Criminal Justice Act 2003 applies to the offender, a period equal to two-thirds of the sentence;(fd) in any other case where section 247A of the Criminal Justice Act 2003 applies to the offender in respect of the custodial sentence, a period equal to two-thirds of the sentence;”.(2) In section 166 of the Sentencing Code (extension of driving disqualification period where custodial sentence also imposed)—(a) in the table in subsection (5)—(i) in entries 3 and 5, in the third column, for “half” substitute “two- thirds of”;(ii) after entry 6A insert—
“6B6C
a custodial sentence in respect of which section 244ZA of the Criminal Justice Act 2003 applies to the offendera custodial sentence not within any of the preceding entries in respect of which section 247A of the Criminal
two-thirds of the sentencetwo-thirds of the sentence”;
154	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 7 – Sentencing and releaseCHAPTER 1 – Custodial sentences Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesJustice Act 2003 applies to the offender(b) after subsection (5) insert—“(5A) In the case of a sentence specified in entry 2, 4 or 6 of column 2 in the table which is within section 247A(2A) of the Criminal Justice Act 2003, the corresponding entry in column 3 of the table is to be read with the omission of “two-thirds of”.”(3) The amendments made by subsection (2)(a)(i) do not have effect in relation to an offender who—(a) is sentenced before the coming into force of section 107 (increase in requisite custodial period for certain offenders of particular concern), and(b) on being sentenced, will be a prisoner to whom section 244A of the Criminal Justice Act 2003 (release on licence of prisoners serving sentence under 278 of the Sentencing Code etc) applies.(4) In the Sentencing Act 2020—(a) in section 417 (commencement of prospective amendments), in subsection (3) (a), after “40,” insert “40A,”;(b) in Schedule 22, after paragraph 40 (prospective amendment of section 166(5) of the Sentencing Code) insert—“40A	In section 166(5A) (adaptation of disqualification period in certain terrorist cases), in paragraph (a), omit “, 4”;”(c) also in Schedule 22, in paragraph 102 (prospective amendment of section 35A of the Road Traffic Offenders Act 1988)—(i) in the words before sub-paragraph (a), omit “as amended by paragraph 102(2) of Schedule 24”;(ii) after sub-paragraph (a) insert—“(aa)	in paragraph (fza) omit “266(a) or”;”;(iii) at the end insert—“(c)	in paragraph (fb) omit “268A or” and “268C(2) or”.”(5) In Schedule 22 to the Coroners and Justice Act 2009, omit paragraph 34 (power to make transitional provision in relation to section 35A of the Road Traffic Offenders Act 1988).141 Increase in driving disqualification periods under certain existing orders:England and Wales(1) Subsection (2) applies where—(a) a driving disqualification order was made in accordance with an extended disqualification provision,(b) the custodial sentence as a result of which the extended disqualification provision applied was imposed before the day on which section 140 came into force,(a) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32) PART 7 – Sentencing and releaseCHAPTER 1 – Custodial sentences Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
155
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(c) section 244ZA (inserted by section 130) or 247A of the Criminal Justice Act 2003 applies to the offender in respect of the sentence (the offender, in particular, not having been released in respect of the sentence), and(d) the appropriate extension period for the purposes of the order would have been longer had the sentence been imposed on the day on which section 140 came into force.(2) The order has effect, on and after the day on which section 140 comes into force, as if the period of disqualification included an appropriate extension period of such length as it would have included had the custodial sentence been imposed on that day.(3) For the purposes of this section, the “extended disqualification provisions” are—(a) section 35A of the Road Traffic Offenders Act 1988,(b) section 147A of the Powers of Criminal Courts (Sentencing) Act 2000, and(c) section 166 of the Sentencing Code,and “appropriate extension period”, “driving disqualification order” and “custodial sentence” are to be read in accordance with the extended disqualification provision concerned.(4) In the application of this section before section 130 comes into force, the reference in subsection (1)(c) to section 244ZA of the Criminal Justice Act 2003 is to be read as a reference to section 244 of that Act as modified by the Release of Prisoners (Alteration of Relevant Proportion of Sentence) Order 2020 (S.I. 2020/158).(5) In the application of this section in relation to a custodial sentence imposed under a provision repealed by the Sentencing Act 2020, the references to the sentence in subsections (1)(d) and (2) are to be read as referring to an equivalent sentence imposed under the corresponding provision of the Sentencing Code.142 Extension of driving disqualification where custodial sentence imposed: Scotland(1) Section 35C of the Road Traffic Offenders Act 1988 (extension of driving disqualification period where custodial sentence also imposed) is amended in accordance with subsections (2) to (5).(2) In subsection (4)—(a) after paragraph (a) insert—“(aa)  in the case of a person serving a serious terrorism sentence, a period equal to the appropriate custodial term;(ab) in the case of a person serving an extended sentence that falls within section 1AB(2A) of the Prisoners and Criminal Proceedings (Scotland) Act 1993 (“the 1993 Act”), a period equal to the custodial term;(ac)  in the case of a person serving an extended sentence in respect of which section 1AB(3) to (5) of the 1993 Act applies to the person, a period equal to two-thirds of the custodial term;”;(b) omit paragraph (b);(a) 
156	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 7 – Sentencing and releaseCHAPTER 1 – Custodial sentences Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(c) in paragraph (c)—(i) for “an” substitute “any other”;(ii) for “confinement” substitute “custodial”;(d) after paragraph (c) insert—“(ca) in the case of a person serving a sentence imposed under section 205ZC of the Criminal Procedure (Scotland) Act 1995 (“the 1995 Act”), a period equal to two-thirds of the appropriate custodial term;(cb) in the case of a person serving any other sentence of imprisonment in respect of which section 1AB of the 1993 Act applies to the person, a period equal to two-thirds of the sentence;”.(3) In subsection (7), for the words from “a different” to the end substitute “a reference in section 1(1) or (3) or 1AB(3)(a) of the 1993 Act to a particular proportion of a prisoner’s sentence to be construed as a reference to some other proportion (“the new proportion”) specified in the order”.(4) In subsection (8), for “(4)(b) and (c)” substitute “(4)(ac), (c), (ca), (cb) or (d)”.(5) In subsection (10)—(a) in the definition of “amending order”, for “section 7 of the 2007 Act” substitute “section 27(2)(b) of the 1993 Act”;(b) after that definition insert—““appropriate custodial term”—(a) in relation to a serious terrorism sentence, means the term imposed under subsection (5)(a) or (as the case may be) (7)(a) of section 205ZA of the 1995 Act;(b) in relation to a sentence imposed under section 205ZC of the 1995 Act, means the term imposed under subsection (3)(a) or (as the case may be) (4)(a) of that section;”;(c) in the definition of “confinement term”—(i) for “confinement” substitute “custodial”;(ii) for “Criminal Procedure (Scotland) Act 1995 (“the 1995 Act”)” substitute “1995 Act”;(d) omit the definitions of “custody and community prisoner” and “custody part”;(e) in the definition of “life prisoner”, for “section 4 of the 2007 Act” substitute “section 2(1) of the 1993 Act”;(f) for the definition of “punishment part” substitute—““punishment part”, in relation to a life sentence, means the punishment part of the sentence as specified in an order mentioned in section 2(2) of the 1993 Act;”;(g) in the definition of “sentence of imprisonment”, in paragraph (b), after “205,” insert “205ZA(7), 205ZC(4),”;(h) after the definition of “sentence of imprisonment” insert—““serious terrorism sentence” means a sentence imposed under section 205ZA of the 1995 Act;”.(6) Section 248D of the Criminal Procedure (Scotland) Act 1995 (extension of driving disqualification period where custodial sentence also imposed) is amended in accordance with subsections (7) to (10).(2) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32) PART 7 – Sentencing and releaseCHAPTER 1 – Custodial sentences Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
157
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(7) In subsection (4)—(a) after paragraph (a) insert—“(aa)  in the case of a person serving a serious terrorism sentence, a period equal to the appropriate custodial term;(ab) in the case of a person serving an extended sentence that falls within section 1AB(2A) of the Prisoners and Criminal Proceedings (Scotland) Act 1993 (“the 1993 Act”), a period equal to the custodial term;(ac)  in the case of a person serving an extended sentence in respect of which section 1AB(3) to (5) of the 1993 Act applies to the person, a period equal to two-thirds of the custodial term;”;(b) omit paragraph (b);(c) in paragraph (c)—(i) for “an” substitute “any other”;(ii) for “confinement” substitute “custodial”;(d) after paragraph (c) insert—“(ca) in the case of a person serving a sentence imposed under section 205ZC of the Criminal Procedure (Scotland) Act 1995 (“the 1995 Act”), a period equal to two-thirds of the appropriate custodial term;(cb) in the case of a person serving any other sentence of imprisonment in respect of which section 1AB of the 1993 Act applies to the person, a period equal to two-thirds of the sentence;”.(8) In subsection (7), for the words from “a different” to the end substitute “a reference in section 1(1) or (3), 1AA(1) or 1AB(3)(a) of the 1993 Act to a particular proportion of a prisoner’s sentence to be construed as a reference to some other proportion (“the new proportion”) specified in the order”.(9) In subsection (8), for “(4)(b) and (c)” substitute “(4)(ac), (c), (ca), (cb) or (d)”.(10) In subsection (10)—(a) in the definition of “amending order”, for “section 7 of the 2007 Act” substitute “section 27(2)(b) of the 1993 Act”;(b) after that definition insert—““appropriate custodial term”—(a) in relation to a serious terrorism sentence, means the term imposed under subsection (5)(a) or (as the case may be) (7)(a) of section 205ZA of the 1995 Act;(b) in relation to a sentence imposed under section 205ZC of the 1995 Act, means the term imposed under subsection (3)(a) or (as the case may be) (4)(a) of that section;”;(c) in the definition of “confinement term”—(i) for “confinement” substitute “custodial”;(ii) for “Criminal Procedure (Scotland) Act 1995 (“the 1995 Act”)” substitute “1995 Act”;(d) omit the definitions of “custody and community prisoner” and “custody part”;(e) in the definition of “life prisoner”, for “section 4 of the 2007 Act” substitute “section 2(1) of the 1993 Act”;(a) 
158	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 7 – Sentencing and releaseCHAPTER 1 – Custodial sentences Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(f) for the definition of “punishment part” substitute—““punishment part”, in relation to a life sentence, means the punishment part of the sentence as specified in an order mentioned in section 2(2) of the 1993 Act;”;(g) in the definition of “sentence of imprisonment”, in paragraph (b), after “205,” insert “205ZA(7), 205ZC(4),”;(h) after the definition of “sentence of imprisonment” insert—““serious terrorism sentence” means a sentence imposed under section 205ZA of the 1995 Act;”.(11) In Schedule 22 to the Coroners and Justice Act 2009, omit paragraphs 35 and 36 (powers to make transitional provision in relation to section 35C of the Road Traffic Offenders Act 1988).143 Increase in driving disqualification periods under certain existing orders:Scotland(1) Subsection (2) applies where—(a) a driving disqualification order was made in accordance with an extended disqualification provision,(b) the sentence of imprisonment as a result of which the extended disqualification provision applied was imposed before the day on which section 142 came into force,(c) section 1AB of the Prisoners and Criminal Proceedings (Scotland) Act 1993 applies to the offender in respect of the sentence (the offender, in particular, not having been released in respect of the sentence), and(d) the appropriate extension period for the purposes of the order would have been longer had the sentence been imposed on the day on which section 142 came into force.(2) The order has effect, on and after the day on which section 142 comes into force, as if the period of disqualification included an appropriate extension period of such length as it would have included had the sentence of imprisonment been imposed on that day.(3) In this section—“driving disqualification order” means an order under—(a) section 34 or 35 of the Road Traffic Offenders Act 1988 (“the 1988 Act”), or(b) section 248 or 248A of the Criminal Procedure (Scotland) Act 1995 (“the 1995 Act”);“an extended disqualification provision” means—(a) section 35C of the 1988 Act (in the case of an order under section 34 or 35 of that Act), or(b) section 248D of the 1995 Act (in the case of an order under section 248 or 248A of the 1995 Act);(a) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32) PART 7 – Sentencing and releaseCHAPTER 1 – Custodial sentences Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
159
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes  “appropriate extension period” and “sentence of imprisonment” are to be read in accordance with the extended disqualification provision concerned.Minor amendments144 Calculation of period before release or Parole Board referral where multiple sentences being served(1) In the Crime (Sentences) Act 1997—(a) in section 28(7) (time of Parole Board referral), omit paragraph (c) (and the “and” immediately before it);(b) before section 34 insert—“33A Life prisoners also serving fixed-term sentence(1) This section applies where a life prisoner is also serving one or more sentences by virtue of which the fixed-term provisions apply to the offender.(2) Nothing in this Chapter requires the Secretary of State to release the prisoner unless the Secretary of State is also required by the fixed- term provisions to release the prisoner.(3) Nothing in this Chapter requires the Secretary of State to refer the prisoner’s case to the Parole Board unless the Secretary of State is also required by the fixed-term provisions to—(a) refer the prisoner’s case to the Board, or(b) release the prisoner.(4) Subsection (3) does not apply to a reference by the Secretary of State under section 31A(3).(5) The fact that the prisoner is serving a life sentence is to be ignored in determining, for the purposes of subsections (2) and (3), what the fixed-term provisions require.(6) In this section “the fixed-term provisions” means Chapter 6 of Part 12 of the Criminal Justice Act 2003.”;(c) in section 34 (interpretation), omit subsection (4).(2) The Criminal Justice Act 2003 is amended in accordance with subsections (3) to (11).(3) In section 243A(3) (requisite custodial period before release in short sentence), for “264(2)” substitute “264(2B) or (2E)”.(4) In section 244(3)(d) (usual requisite custodial period before release), for “264(2)” substitute “264(2B) or (2E)”.(1) 
160	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 7 – Sentencing and releaseCHAPTER 1 – Custodial sentences Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(5) In section 244A(6) (periods before release or referral in sentences for offenders of particular concern), in paragraph (b) of the definition of “requisite custodial period”, for “264(2)” substitute “264(2D)”.(6) In section 246A(8) (periods before release or referral in extended sentences), in paragraph (b) of the definition of “requisite custodial period”, for “264(2)” substitute “264(2B), (2D) or (2E)”.(7) In section 247(7) (periods before release in old extended sentences), in paragraph (b) of the definition of “requisite custodial period”, for “264(2)” substitute “264(2B) or (2E)”.(8) In section 247A(8) (release of terrorist prisoners: definitions), in paragraph (c) of the definition of “requisite custodial period”, for “264(2)” substitute “264(2B), (2D) or (2E)”.(9) In section 263 (release in case of concurrent sentences), in subsection (2), after paragraph (a) insert—“(aza) nothing in this Chapter requires the Secretary of State to refer the offender’s case to the Board in respect of any of the terms unless and until the Secretary of State is required either—(i) to refer the offender’s case to the Board, or    (ii) to release the offender, in respect of each of the others,”.(10) In section 264 (release in case of consecutive sentences)—(a) for subsection (2) substitute—“(2A) Subsection (2B) applies if each of the terms of imprisonment is subject to initial automatic release.(2B) Nothing in this Chapter requires the Secretary of State to release the offender until the offender has served a period equal to the aggregate of the length of the minimum custodial periods in each of the terms.(2C) Subsections (2D) and (2E) apply if at least one of the terms of imprisonment is subject to initial Parole Board referral.(2D) Nothing in this Chapter requires the Secretary of State to refer the offender’s case to the Board until the offender has served a period equal to the aggregate length of the minimum custodial periods in each of the terms.(2E) Nothing in this Chapter requires the Secretary of State to release the offender until—(a) the Board has directed the release of the offender, or(b) the offender has served a period equal to the aggregate length of—(i) the minimum custodial periods in each of the terms (if any) that is subject to initial automatic release, and(ii) the maximum custodial periods in each of the terms that is subject to initial Parole Board referral.(2F) For the purposes of subsections (2A) to (2E)—
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32) PART 7 – Sentencing and releaseCHAPTER 1 – Custodial sentences Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
161
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(a) a term of imprisonment is “subject to initial automatic release” if it is a sentence in respect of which—(i) section 243A(1), 244(1), 244ZA(1), 246A(2) or 247applies to the offender, or(ii) section 247A applies, but subsections (3) to (5) of that section do not apply, to the offender;(b) a term of imprisonment is “subject to initial Parole Board referral” if it is a sentence in respect of which—(i) section 244ZC, 244A, 246A(3) to (7) or 247A(3) to(5) applies to the offender, or(ii) a notice under section 244ZB(4) is in force.”;(b) in subsections (6) and (6A), in the words before paragraph (a), before “custodial” insert “minimum”;(c) after subsection (6A) insert—“(6B) In this section “maximum custodial period” means—(a) in relation to a sentence imposed under section 226A, 226B, 227, 228 or 236A of this Act or section 252A, 254, 265, 266, 278 or 279 of the Sentencing Code, the “appropriate custodial term” determined by the court under that section;(b) in relation to any other sentence, the term of the sentence.”(11) After section 267B insert—“267C Fixed-term prisoners also serving life sentence(1) This section applies where a fixed-term prisoner is also serving one or more sentences by virtue of which the life sentence provisions apply to the offender.(2) Nothing in this Chapter requires the Secretary of State to release the prisoner unless the Secretary of State is also required by the life sentence provisions to release the prisoner.(3) Nothing in this Chapter requires the Secretary of State to refer the prisoner’s case to the Board unless the Secretary of State is also required by the life sentence provisions to—(a) refer the prisoner’s case to the Board, or(b) release the prisoner.(4) The reference in subsection (3)(a) to a requirement of the Secretary of State to refer a prisoner’s case to the Board does not include a requirement to do so under section 31A(3) of the 1997 Act.(5) The fact that the prisoner is also serving a fixed-term sentence is to be ignored in determining, for the purposes of subsections (2) and (3), what the life sentence provisions require.(6) In this section “the life sentence provisions” means Chapter 2 of Part 2 of the 1997 Act.”(12) In section 11 of the Criminal Justice and Courts Act 2015 (release on licence of life prisoners), omit subsections (1) and (4).(1) 
162	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 7 – Sentencing and releaseCHAPTER 1 – Custodial sentences Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes145 Application of release provisions to repatriated prisoners(1) In the Schedule to the Repatriation of Prisoners Act 1984, in paragraph 2 (application of early release provisions) as it applies in relation to prisoners repatriated to England and Wales—(a) omit sub-paragraphs (3) and (3A);(b) for sub-paragraphs (3B) to (3F) (inserted by the Counter-Terrorism and Sentencing Act 2021) substitute—“(3ZA) The Secretary of State may specify in the warrant that the prisoner is to be treated for the purposes of the enactments relating to release on licence as if the sentence to be served by the prisoner was imposed in respect of—(a) a particular offence under the law of England and Wales,(b) such an offence carried out in a certain manner or in certain circumstances, or(c) such an offence in relation to which certain findings were made by the court before which the prisoner was convicted or sentenced for the offence;and if that is done those enactments have effect accordingly.(3ZB) An offence may be specified under sub-paragraph (3ZA) only if it corresponds to the offence in respect of which the prisoner is required to be detained in the country or territory from which the prisoner is transferred (“the overseas offence”).(3ZC) A specification under sub-paragraph (3ZA)(b) may be made only if, in the opinion of the Secretary of State, findings made by the court before which the prisoner was convicted or sentenced for the overseas offence show that the overseas offence was committed in the manner or circumstances to be specified (or in a corresponding manner or corresponding circumstances).(3ZD) A finding may be specified under sub-paragraph (3ZA)(c) only if, in the opinion of the Secretary of State, findings made by the court before which the prisoner was convicted or sentenced for the overseas offence show that the finding to be specified could properly have been made by a court in England and Wales dealing with the prisoner.(3ZE) Sub-paragraph (3ZA) does not result in the enactments relating to release on licence applying in a way in which they could not apply in relation to a sentence imposed in respect of the offence specified under that sub-paragraph—(a) that was committed at the same time as the overseas offence was committed, or(a) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32) PART 7 – Sentencing and releaseCHAPTER 1 – Custodial sentences Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
163
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(b) in respect of which a conviction was made, or sentence passed, at the same time as occurred in respect of the overseas offence.(3ZF) The Secretary of State may amend a warrant (whether issued before or after sub-paragraph (3ZA) comes into force and whether or not the transfer it authorised has taken place) so as to specify the matters there referred to.”;(c) in sub-paragraph (4), in the definition of “the enactments relating to release on licence”, for “and Chapter 6 of Part 12 of the Criminal Justice Act 2003” substitute “, Chapter 6 of Part 12 of the Criminal Justice Act 2003 and section 28 of the Offender Management Act 2007”.(2) The repeal by subsection (1)(b) of sub-paragraphs (3B) to (3F) of the amended paragraph does not affect the continued operation of the enactments relating to release on licence (within the meaning of that paragraph as amended by subsection (1)) in relation to a warrant issued or amended in accordance with those sub-paragraphs before their repeal.(3) In Schedule 26 to the Criminal Justice and Immigration Act 2008, the following provisions (which contain superseded amendments of or in connection with the paragraph amended by subsection (1)) are repealed—(a) paragraph 19(4) and (5), and(b) paragraph 33(2) and (3).146 Sentences and offences in respect of which polygraph condition may be imposedIn section 28 of the Offender Management Act 2007 (application of polygraph condition)—(a) in subsection (3), for paragraphs (a) to (g) substitute—“(a) a life sentence within the meaning of Chapter 2 of Part 2 of the Crime (Sentences) Act 1997 (see section 34(2) of that Act), or(b) a fixed-term sentence within the meaning of Chapter 6 of Part 12 of the Criminal Justice Act 2003 (see section 237 of that Act) of a term of 12 months or more.”;(b) in subsection (4), for the words from “means—” to the end substitute “means an offence specified in any one or more of—(a) Schedule 3 to the Sexual Offences Act 2003 (sexual offences attracting notification requirements),(b) Part 2 of Schedule 15 to the Criminal Justice Act 2003 (sexual offences under the law of England and Wales specified for certain purposes),(c) paragraphs 1 to 21 of Schedule 16 to that Act (sexual offences under the law of Scotland specified for certain purposes), as that Schedule had effect immediately before its repeal on 14 July 2008, and(a) 
164	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 7 – Sentencing and releaseCHAPTER 1 – Custodial sentences Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(d) Part 2 of Schedule 17 to that Act (sexual offences under the law of Northern Ireland specified for certain purposes), as that Schedule had effect immediately before its repeal on 14 July 2008.”;(c) after subsection (4) insert—“(4ZA) In determining for the purposes of subsection (4) whether an offence is specified in Schedule 3 to the Sexual Offences Act 2003, any limitation in that Schedule referring to the circumstances of a particular case (including the sentence imposed) is to be disregarded.”;(d) in subsection (4A) (inserted by the Counter-Terrorism and Sentencing Act 2021), omit paragraph (b) (but not the final “or”);(e) in subsection (4B) (also so inserted), omit paragraph (a);(f) after subsection (4B) insert—“(4C) A sentence in respect of a service offence is to be treated for the purposes of this section as if it were a sentence in respect of the corresponding offence.(4D) In subsection (4C)—(a) “service offence” means an offence under—(i) section 42 of the Armed Forces Act 2006,(ii) section 70 of the Army Act 1955 or the Air Force Act 1955, or(iii) section 42 of the Naval Discipline Act 1957;(b) “corresponding offence” means—(i) in relation to an offence under section 42 of the Armed Forces Act 2006, the corresponding offence under the law of England and Wales within the meaning of that section;(ii) in relation to an offence under section 70 of the Army Act 1955 or the Air Force Act 1955, the corresponding civil offence within the meaning of that Act;(iii) in relation to an offence under section 42 of the Naval Discipline Act 1957, the civil offence within the meaning of that section.(4E) Section 48 of the Armed Forces Act 2006 (supplementary provisions relating to ancillary service offences) applies for the purposes of subsection (4D)(b)(i) above as it applies for the purposes of the provisions of that Act referred to in subsection (3)(b) of that section.”
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32) PART 7 – Sentencing and releaseCHAPTER 1 – Custodial sentences Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
165
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes147 Minor amendments to do with weapons-related offences(1) In Schedule 15 to the Criminal Justice Act 2003 (specified offences for certain purposes to do with release of offenders)—(a) after paragraph 60 insert—“60A	An offence under section 47 of the Anti-Terrorism, Crime and Security Act 2001 (use etc of nuclear weapons).60B	An offence under section 50 of that Act (assisting or inducing certain weapons-related acts overseas).”;(b) omit paragraphs 163 and 164;(c) in paragraph 165, for “that Act” substitute “the Anti-Terrorism, Crime and Security Act 2001”.(2) In Schedule 18 to the Sentencing Code (specified offences for certain sentencing purposes)—(a) after paragraph 23 insert—“Anti-Terrorism, Crime and Security Act 200123A	An offence under either of the following provisions of the Anti- Terrorism, Crime and Security Act 2001—(a) section 47 (use etc of nuclear weapons);(b) section 50 (assisting or inducing certain weapons-related acts overseas).”;(b) for paragraph 42 substitute—“42	An offence under section 113 of the Anti-Terrorism, Crime and Security Act 2001 (use of noxious substance or thing to cause harm or intimidate).”148 Application of provision about minimum terms to service offencesIn section 261A of the Armed Forces Act 2006 (life sentences imposed by Court Martial), at the end insert—“(5) Schedule 21, as it applies in relation to a sentence passed by the Court Martial, has effect as if a reference to murder included reference to an offence under section 42 as respects which the corresponding offence under the law of England and Wales is murder.”
166	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 7 – Sentencing and releaseCHAPTER 2 – Community sentences Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesCHAPTER 2COMMUNITY SENTENCESCommunity and suspended sentence ordersPROSPECTIVE149 Supervision by responsible officer(1) The Sentencing Code is amended as follows.(2) In section 215 (community order: duty of offender to keep in touch with responsible officer)—(a) after subsection (1) insert—“(1A) In a case where the offender was convicted on or after the day on which section 149 of the Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 came into force, the responsible officer may from time to time give the offender an instruction to attend an appointment (with the responsible officer or with another person) for the purposes of—(a) the rehabilitation of the offender, or(b) the protection of the public.(1B) The offender must comply with any instruction given by the responsible officer under subsection (1A).”;(b) in subsection (2), at the beginning insert “In the case of any community order (whenever the offender was convicted)”;(c) after subsection (2) insert—“(2A) The powers under subsections (1A) and (2) to give instructions apply even if all the requirements of the community order have been complied with.”;(d) in subsection (3), for “This obligation” substitute “An obligation under this section”.(3) In section 301 (suspended sentence order: duty of offender to keep in touch with responsible officer)—(a) after subsection (1) insert—“(1A) In a case where the offender was convicted on or after the day on which section 149 of the Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 came into force, the responsible officer may from time to time give the offender an instruction to attend an appointment (with the responsible officer or with another person) for the purposes of—(a) the rehabilitation of the offender, or(b) the protection of the public.(1B) The offender must comply with any instruction given by the responsible officer under subsection (1A).”;(b) in subsection (2), at the beginning insert “In the case of any suspended sentence order (whenever the offender was convicted)”;(a) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32) PART 7 – Sentencing and releaseCHAPTER 2 – Community sentences Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
167
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes150 Increases in maximum daily curfew hours and curfew requirement period(1) Paragraph 9 of Schedule 9 to the Sentencing Code (community orders and suspended sentence orders: curfew requirement) is amended in accordance with subsections (2) to (5).(2) In sub-paragraph (4)—(a) omit the “and” at the end of paragraph (a);(b) in paragraph (b), for “16 hours” substitute “the relevant number of hours”;(c) at the end insert “, and(c) not more than 112 hours in any period of 7 days beginning with the day of the week on which the requirement first takes effect.”(3) After sub-paragraph (4) insert—“(4A) In sub-paragraph (4) “the relevant number of hours” means—(a) in relation to a relevant order in respect of an offence of which the offender was convicted before the day on which section 150 of the Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 came into force, 16 hours, and(b) in relation to a relevant order in respect of an offence of which the offender was convicted on or after that day, 20 hours.”(4) In sub-paragraph (5), for the words “the period of 12 months” substitute “the relevant period”.(5) After sub-paragraph (5) insert—“(6) In sub-paragraph (5) “the relevant period” means—(a) in relation to a relevant order in respect of an offence of which the offender was convicted before the day on which section 150 of the Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 came into force, the period of 12 months, and(b) in relation to a relevant order in respect of an offence of which the offender was convicted on or after that day, the period of 2 years.”(6) In paragraph 13 of Schedule 23 to the Sentencing Act 2020 (powers to amend limits in community requirements)—(a) in sub-paragraph (1)(b), after “9(4)” insert “or (4A)”;(a) 
168	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 7 – Sentencing and releaseCHAPTER 2 – Community sentences Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(b) in sub-paragraph (2)(a), for “9(5)” substitute “9(6)”.(7) The Criminal Justice Act 2003 is amended in accordance with subsections (8) and (9).(8) In Schedule 19A (supervision default orders)—(a) in paragraph 2 (application of community orders provisions to supervision default orders), in paragraph (h), for “9(1) to (4)” substitute “9(1) to (4A)”;(b) in paragraph 3—(i) in sub-paragraph (6), in the substituted sub-paragraph (4)(a), for “16 hours” substitute “the relevant number of hours”;(ii) after sub-paragraph (6) insert—“(6A) Paragraph 9(4A) of that Schedule applies as if references to an offence of which the offender was convicted before, on or after a day were references to a failure by a person to comply with a requirement that occurred before, on or after that day.”(9) In Schedule 31 (default orders: modification of provisions relating to community orders), in paragraph 3—(a) after sub-paragraph (1) insert—“(1A) Any reference to an offence of which the offender was convicted before, on or after a day is to be read as a reference to a default made by a person before, on or after that day.”;(b) in sub-paragraph (2)—(i) for “sub-paragraph (4)” substitute “sub-paragraph (4A)”;(ii) for “(4A)” substitute “(4B)”.151 Power for responsible officer to vary curfew requirements etc(1) The Sentencing Code is amended as follows.(2) In Part 5 of Schedule 9 (community orders and suspended sentence orders: curfew requirements), after paragraph 10 insert—“Power of responsible officer to vary curfew requirement10A  (1) This paragraph applies where—(a) a relevant order is in force,(b) the order is in respect of an offence of which the offender was convicted on or after the day on which section 151 of the Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 came into force,(c) the order includes a curfew requirement imposed under paragraph 9, and(d) the responsible officer considers that the variation condition is met.(a) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32) PART 7 – Sentencing and releaseCHAPTER 2 – Community sentences Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
169
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(2) The variation condition is met if, having regard to a change in the offender’s circumstances since the relevant order was made, it is appropriate to—(a) vary the start time of any of the curfew periods;(b) vary the relevant place in relation to any of those periods.(3) The responsible officer may, with the consent of the offender, give the offender notice (a “variation notice”) specifying—(a) the new start time of such of the curfew periods as are specified in the notice;(b) the new relevant place for such of the curfew periods as are so specified.(4) The effect of a variation notice is to vary the relevant order as specified in the notice, with effect from the date so specified.(5) A variation notice may specify different variations of the start time, or of the relevant place, for different days.(6) Before giving a variation notice containing provision pursuant to sub- paragraph (3)(b), the responsible officer must obtain and consider information about each place proposed to be specified in the notice.(7) That information must include information as to the attitude of persons likely to be affected by the offender’s enforced presence there.(8) A variation notice must not—(a) vary the length of any of the offender’s curfew periods;(b) in a case where the relevant order includes a residence requirement under paragraph 13, vary the relevant place in a way that is inconsistent with that requirement;(c) make any variation prohibited by sub-paragraph (9).(9) A variation is prohibited by this sub-paragraph if—(a) the relevant order concerned includes an electronic compliance monitoring requirement imposed under paragraph 10(3) (a “monitoring requirement”), and(b) the responsible officer considers that, if the court had made the relevant order imposing the curfew requirement as varied by the variation, the court—(i) would not have imposed the monitoring requirement, or(ii) would have imposed a different monitoring requirement.(10) The responsible officer must give the appropriate court—(a) a copy of a variation notice given under this paragraph, and(b) evidence of the offender’s consent to the notice.(11) In this paragraph—(a) “appropriate court”—(i) in relation to a community order, has the same meaning as in Schedule 10 (see paragraph 1 of that Schedule);(i) 
170	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 7 – Sentencing and releaseCHAPTER 2 – Community sentences Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(ii) in relation to a suspended sentence order, has the same meaning as in Schedule 16 (see paragraph 1 of that Schedule);(b) “curfew periods”, in relation to a relevant order, means the periods specified in the order under paragraph 9(2)(a);(c) “relevant place”, in relation to a curfew period, means the place specified under paragraph 9(2)(b) at which the offender is required to remain for that period;(d) “start time”, in relation to a curfew period, means the time at which the period is required to start pursuant to the relevant order.”(3) In paragraph 16 of Schedule 10 (amendment of community order because of change of residence), after sub-paragraph (2) insert—“(3) If the permission is given by the responsible officer—(a) the officer must give notice to the appropriate court of the permission, and(b) the court must amend the order as set out in sub-paragraph (2).”(4) After paragraph 17 of that Schedule insert—“Amendment because of variation of curfew requirement by responsible officer17A	(1) This paragraph applies where at any time the responsible officer gives—(a) a copy of a variation notice in relation to a community order, and(b) evidence of the offender’s consent to the notice,to the appropriate court under paragraph 10A of Schedule 9.(2) The appropriate court must amend the order to reflect the effect of the variation notice.”(5) In paragraph 23 of Schedule 16 (amendment of suspended sentence order) because of change of residence), after sub-paragraph (2) insert—“(3) If the permission is given by the responsible officer—(a) the officer must give notice to the appropriate court of the permission, and(b) the court must amend the suspended sentence order as set out in sub-paragraph (2).”(6) After paragraph 24 of that Schedule insert—“Amendment because of variation of curfew requirement by responsible officer24A	(1) This paragraph applies where at any time the responsible officer gives—(a) a copy of a variation notice in relation to a suspended sentence order, and(b) evidence of the offender’s consent to the notice,to the appropriate court under paragraph 10A of Schedule 9.(2) The appropriate court must amend the order to reflect the effect of the variation notice.”
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32) PART 7 – Sentencing and releaseCHAPTER 2 – Community sentences Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
171
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes152 Removal of attendance centre requirements for adults(1) The Sentencing Code is amended in accordance with subsections (2) to (4).(2) In section 207(3) (community orders: availability of attendance centre requirement), for the words from “the offender” to the end substitute “—(a) the offender was convicted of the offence before the day on which section 152 of the Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 came into force, and(b) the offender was aged under 25 when convicted of the offence.”(3) In section 291(3) (suspended sentence orders: availability of attendance centre requirement), for the words from “the offender” to the end substitute “—(a) the offender was convicted of the offence before the day on which section 152 of the Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 came into force, and(b) the offender was aged under 25 when convicted of the offence.”(4) In Schedule 9 (community orders and suspended sentence orders: requirements), in the heading to Part 13, after “Attendance centre requirement” insert “: offenders convicted before the day on which section 152 of the Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 came into force”.(5) Schedule 13 contains related amendments.153 Special procedures relating to review and breachSchedule 14 makes provision for, and in relation to, the powers of courts—(a) to review community and suspended sentence orders, and(b) to commit an offender to custody for breach of a community or suspended sentence order.154 Drug testing requirementSchedule 15 amends the Sentencing Code to make provision for a drug testing requirement in community orders and suspended sentence orders.
172	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 7 – Sentencing and releaseCHAPTER 3 – Assaults on those providing a public service etcDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesUnpaid work requirements155 Duty to consult on unpaid work requirementsAfter section 10 of the Offender Management Act 2007 insert—“10A Duty to consult on unpaid work requirements(1) Each provider of probation services must, in each calendar year, consult the prescribed persons about the work to be performed by persons who—(a) are subject to unpaid work requirements, and(b) are supervised by that provider.(2) In this section “prescribed person” means a person, or a person of a description, prescribed by regulations made by the Secretary of State.(3) In this section “unpaid work requirement” means an unpaid work requirement as defined by—(a) paragraph 10(1) of Schedule 6 to the Sentencing Code (youth rehabilitation orders),(b) paragraph 1(1) of Schedule 9 to the Sentencing Code (community orders and suspended sentence orders), or(c) paragraph 3A(1) of Schedule A1 to the Children Act 1989 (enforcement orders).(4) For the purposes of this section a person is supervised by a provider of probation services if an officer of that provider has functions relating to the person’s compliance with an unpaid work requirement.”CHAPTER 3ASSAULTS ON THOSE PROVIDING A PUBLIC SERVICE ETC156 Assaults on those providing a public service etcIn the Sentencing Act 2020, after section 68 insert—“68A Assaults on those providing a public service etc(1) This section applies where—(1) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32) PART 8 – Youth justiceCHAPTER 3 – Assaults on those providing a public service etc Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
173
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(a) a court is considering the seriousness of an offence listed in subsection (3), and(b) the offence is not aggravated under section 67(2).(2) If the offence was committed against a person providing a public service, performing a public duty or providing services to the public, the court—(a) must treat that fact as an aggravating factor, and(b) must state in open court that the offence is so aggravated.(3) The offences referred to in subsection (1) are—(a) an offence of common assault or battery, except where section 1 of the Assaults on Emergency Workers (Offences) Act 2018 applies;(b) an offence under any of the following provisions of the Offences against the Person Act 1861—(i) section 16 (threats to kill);(ii) section 18 (wounding with intent to cause grievous bodily harm);(iii) section 20 (malicious wounding);(iv) section 47 (assault occasioning actual bodily harm);(c) an inchoate offence in relation to any of the preceding offences.(4) In this section—(a) a reference to providing services to the public includes a reference to providing goods or facilities to the public;(b) a reference to the public includes a reference to a section of the public.(5) Nothing in this section prevents a court from treating the fact that an offence was committed against a person providing a public service, performing a public duty or providing services to the public as an aggravating factor in relation to offences not listed in subsection (3).(6) This section has effect in relation to a person who is convicted of the offence on or after the date on which section 156 of the Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 comes into force.”PART 8YOUTH JUSTICEYouth remand157 Youth remand(1) The Legal Aid, Sentencing and Punishment of Offenders Act 2012 is amended as follows.(1) 
174	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 8 – Youth justiceCHAPTER 3 – Assaults on those providing a public service etcDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(2) In section 91 (remands of children otherwise than on bail), after subsection (4) insert—“(4A) Before deciding whether to remand a child to youth detention accommodation in accordance with section 102 the court must consider the interests and welfare of the child.”(3) In section 98 (first set of conditions for a remand to youth detention accommodation)—(a) in subsection (1), after paragraph (a) insert—“(aa)	the sentencing condition (see subsection (2A)),”;(b) after subsection (2) insert—“(2A) The sentencing condition is that it appears to the court that it is very likely that the child will be sentenced to a custodial sentence for the offence mentioned in section 91(1) or one or more of those offences.”;(c) in subsection (4), at the end (after paragraph (b)) insert “, and that the risks posed by the child cannot be managed safely in the community”.(4) In section 99 (second set of conditions for a remand to youth detention accommodation)—(a) in subsection (3), for “there is a real prospect” substitute “it is very likely”;(b) in subsection (5)(a)—(i) after “recent” insert “and significant”;(ii) after “remand” insert “, and it appears to the court that the history is relevant in all the circumstances of the case”;(c) in subsection (6)—(i) after “recent” insert “and significant”;(ii) after “remand” insert “, and this appears to the court relevant in all the circumstances of the case”;(d) in subsection (7), at the end (after paragraph (b)) insert “, and that the risks posed by the child cannot be managed safely in the community”.(5) In section 100 (first set of conditions for a remand to youth detention accommodation: extradition cases)—(a) in subsection (1), after paragraph (a) insert—“(aa)	the sentencing condition (see subsection (2A)),”;(b) after subsection (2) insert—“(2A) The sentencing condition is that it appears to the court that, if the child were convicted in England and Wales of an offence equivalent to the offence to which the extradition proceedings relate or one or more of those offences, it is very likely that the child would be sentenced to a custodial sentence for that offence or those offences.”;(c) in subsection (4), at the end (after paragraph (b)) insert “, and that the risks posed by the child cannot be managed safely in the community”.(6) In section 101 (second set of conditions for a remand to youth detention accommodation: extradition cases)—(a) in subsection (3), for “there would be a real prospect” substitute “it is very likely”;(b) in subsection (5)(a)—(a) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32) PART 8 – Youth justiceCHAPTER 3 – Assaults on those providing a public service etc Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
175
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(i) after “recent” insert “and significant”;(ii) after “remand,” insert “and it appears to the court that the history is relevant in all the circumstances of the case,”;(c) in subsection (6)—(i) after “recent” insert “and significant”;(ii) after “remand” insert “, and this appears to the court relevant in all the circumstances of the case”;(d) in subsection (7), at the end (after paragraph (b)) insert “, and that the risks posed by the child cannot be managed safely in the community”.(7) In section 102 (remands to youth detention accommodation)—(a) in subsection (4), before paragraph (a) insert—“(za)	state in open court that it has considered subsections (3) and (4A) of section 91,”;(b) in subsection (5), before paragraph (a) insert— “(za)	is given in writing to—(i) the child,(ii) any legal representative of the child, and(iii) any youth offending team which appears to the court to have functions in relation to the child,”.Detention and training orders158 Discretion as to length of termIn section 236(1) of the Sentencing Code (term of detention and training order), for “4, 6, 8, 10, 12, 18 or 24 months” substitute “at least 4 months but must not exceed24 months”.159 Consecutive detention and training order and sentence of detention: effect of early release decision(1) In section 237 of the Sentencing Code (making of detention and training order where offender subject to other order or sentence of detention), omit subsection (5).(2) In section 241 of that Code (period of detention and training), after subsection (5) insert—“Consecutive detention and training order and sentence of detention
176	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 8 – Youth justiceCHAPTER 3 – Assaults on those providing a public service etcDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(5A) Where the offender is also subject to a sentence of any of the following kinds that is to take effect, by virtue of an order to which subsection (7) applies, when the offender would otherwise be released for supervision—(a) a sentence of detention under section 250 or 252A,(b) a sentence of detention under section 209 or 224A of the Armed Forces Act 2006, or(c) an extended sentence of detention under section 254 (including one passed as a result of section 221A of the Armed Forces Act 2006),subsection (4) is to be read as if, instead of conferring a power to release the offender, it conferred a power to determine that the Secretary of State would, but for the sentence concerned, have released the offender.”(3) In section 264AA of the Criminal Justice Act 2003 (consecutive terms: detention and training orders), after subsection (1) insert—“(1A) In a case where the detention and training order was made on or after the day on which section 159 of the Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 came into force, section 246(1)(a) is to be read as if, instead of conferring a power to release the offender, it conferred a power to determine that the Secretary of State would, but for the detention and training order, have directed the offender’s release under that section.”160 Detention and training orders: time to count as servedSchedule 16 makes provision in relation to the treatment of time spent remanded in custody or on bail as time served in relation to detention and training orders.Youth rehabilitation orders161 Youth rehabilitation orders(1) Schedule 17 contains amendments to provisions of the Criminal Justice and Immigration Act 2008 and the Sentencing Act 2020 which relate to youth rehabilitation orders.(2) In the following provisions of this section, “the relevant YRO provisions” means—(a) Parts 2 and 3 of Schedule 17, and(b) subsection (1) of this section so far as relating to those Parts.(3) Regulations under section 208(1) which bring any of the relevant YRO provisions into force only for a specified purpose or in relation to a specified area may—(1) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32) PART 8 – Youth justiceCHAPTER 3 – Assaults on those providing a public service etc Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
177
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(a) provide for that provision to be in force for that purpose or in relation to that area for a specified period, and(b) make transitional or saving provision in connection with that provision ceasing to be in force at the end of the specified period.(4) Regulations containing provision by virtue of subsection (3)(a) may be amended by subsequent regulations under section 208(1) so as to continue any of the relevant YRO provisions in force for the specified purpose or in relation to the specified area for a further specified period.(5) Accordingly, the reference to section 419(1) of the Sentencing Act 2020, as applied by section 206, to the coming into force of an amendment is to be read as including a reference to the continuing in force of an amendment by reason of subsection (4).(6) In subsections (3) and (4), “specified” means specified in regulations under section 208(1).(7) Subsection (8) applies if—(a) the Secretary of State has made regulations under section 208(1) which make provision permitted by subsection (3), and(b) the Secretary of State subsequently makes regulations under section 208(1) which bring any of the relevant YRO provisions into force without making provision permitted by subsection (3).(8) The regulations mentioned in subsection (7)(b) may—(a) provide that those provisions are to come into force with the amendments specified in the regulations;(b) make amendments to the Criminal Justice and Immigration Act 2008 or the Sentencing Act 2020 in consequence of the amendments made by paragraph (a).(9) A statutory instrument containing regulations under section 208(1) which make provision permitted by subsection (8) (whether alone or with other provision) may not be made unless a draft of the instrument has been laid before and approved by a resolution of each House of Parliament.Abolition of reparation orders162 Abolition of reparation ordersIn section 110(1) of the Sentencing Code (availability of reparation order), before paragraph (a) insert—“(za) the offender is convicted of the offence before the day on which section 162 of the Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 comes into force,”.
178	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 9 – Secure children's homes and secure 16 to 19 AcademiesCHAPTER 3 – Assaults on those providing a public service etcDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesPART 9SECURE CHILDREN'S HOMES AND SECURE 16 TO 19 ACADEMIES163 Temporary release from secure children’s homes(1) This section applies to a person who is detained in a secure children’s home in pursuance of—(a) a sentence of detention,(b) a detention and training order or a further detention order,(c) a detention order under Schedule 5A to the Policing and Crime Act 2009 (breach of gang injunction), or(d) a detention order under Schedule 2 to the Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (breach of anti-social behaviour injunction).(2) The Secretary of State or the manager of the home may temporarily release a person to whom this section applies.(3) A temporary release under this section may be granted subject to conditions.(4) A person who is temporarily released under this section may be recalled at any time by the Secretary of State or the manager of the home (irrespective of which of those granted the release).(5) A manager of a secure children’s home must have regard to any guidance issued by the Secretary of State about the use of powers of temporary release under this section.(6) In this section—  “detention and training order” has the same meaning as in the Sentencing Code (see section 233 of that Code) and includes an order made under section 100 of the Powers of Criminal Courts (Sentencing) Act 2000 or section 211 of the Armed Forces Act 2006;  “further detention order” has the same meaning as in Schedule 12 to the Sentencing Code (see paragraph 1 of that Schedule) and includes an order made under section 104(3) of the Powers of Criminal Courts (Sentencing) Act 2000 and a further detention order made by virtue of section 213 of the Armed Forces Act 2006;“manager”—(a) in relation to a secure children’s home in England, means the person who is registered under Part 2 of the Care Standards Act 2000 as the manager of the home or, in a case where no such person is registered, the person who is registered under that Part as the person who carries on the home;(b) in relation to a secure children’s home in Wales, means the person who is designated as the responsible individual in respect of the home for the purposes of Part 1 of the Regulation and Inspection of Social Care (Wales) Act 2016;(a) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 9 – Secure children's homes and secure 16 to 19 Academies CHAPTER 3 – Assaults on those providing a public service etc Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
179
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes“secure children’s home”—(a) in relation to England, means a children’s home, within the meaning of section 1 of the Care Standards Act 2000, which provides accommodation for the purposes of restricting liberty;(b) in relation to Wales, means residential premises which provide a secure accommodation service within the meaning of Part 1 of the Regulation and Inspection of Social Care (Wales) Act 2016 (anaw 2).(7) In section 49 of the Prison Act 1952 (persons unlawfully at large), after subsection (4) insert—“(4ZA) For the purposes of this section a person who, after being temporarily released in pursuance of section 163 of the Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (temporary release from a secure children’s home), is at large at any time during the period for which they are liable to be detained pursuant to their sentence shall be deemed to be unlawfully at large if the period for which they were temporarily released has expired or if they have been recalled under that section.”164 Secure 16 to 19 Academies(1) In section 1B of the Academies Act 2010 (16 to 19 Academies), at the end insert—“(4) A 16 to 19 Academy may provide secure accommodation for its students, but only if it is approved to do so by the Secretary of State.(5) “Secure accommodation” means accommodation that is provided for the purpose of restricting liberty.(6) The Secretary of State may grant approval under subsection (4) subject to conditions.(7) A 16 to 19 Academy which provides secure accommodation for its students is to be known as a secure 16 to 19 Academy.”(2) In section 12 of that Act (charitable and trust corporation status of Academy proprietors etc), at the end insert—“(5) The setting up, establishment and running of a secure 16 to 19 Academy is to be treated as a charitable purpose that falls within the description in section 3(1)(b) of the Charities Act 2011 (advancement of education) for the purposes of—(a) this section,(b) the Charities Act 2011, and(c) any other enactment that applies (in whatever way) the definition of “charitable purpose” in section 2 of that Act.(6) But subsection (5) is to be disregarded in determining, in accordance with section 3(1)(m) of the Charities Act 2011, whether a purpose may be regarded
180	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 10 – Management of offendersCHAPTER 1 – Serious violence reduction orders Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesas analogous to, or within the spirit of, a purpose falling within paragraph (b) of section 3(1) of that Act.”(3) In section 248(1) of the Sentencing Code (meaning of “youth detention accommodation”), after paragraph (b) insert—“(ba)	a secure 16 to 19 Academy,”.(4) In the Children’s Homes (England) Regulations 2015 (S.I. 2015/541)—(a) in regulation 2 (interpretation), in paragraph (1), in the definition of “secure children’s home”—(i) after “means” insert “—(a) ”;(ii) at the end insert “; or(b) a secure 16 to 19 Academy (see section 1B(4) to (7) of the Academies Act 2010);”;(b) in regulation 3 (excepted establishments)—(i) in paragraph (1)(b), for “as” substitute “other than a secure 16 to 19 Academy, as those terms are”;(ii) omit paragraph (1A).PART 10MANAGEMENT OF OFFENDERSCHAPTER 1SERIOUS VIOLENCE REDUCTION ORDERS165 Serious violence reduction orders(1) In Part 11 of the Sentencing Code (behaviour orders) after Chapter 1 insert—“CHAPTER 1ASERIOUS VIOLENCE REDUCTION ORDERS342A Power to make serious violence reduction order(1) This section applies where—(a) a person aged 18 or over (“the offender”) is convicted of an offence which was committed on or after the first appointed day, and(b) the prosecution makes an application to the court for a serious violence reduction order to be made in respect of the offender.(a) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32) PART 10 – Management of offendersCHAPTER 1A – Serious violence reduction orders Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
181
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(2) Subject to subsection (6), the court may make a serious violence reduction order in respect of the offender if—(a) the condition in subsection (3) or (4) is met, and(b) the condition in subsection (5) is met.(3) The condition in this subsection is that the court is satisfied on the balance of probabilities that—(a) a bladed article or offensive weapon was used by the offender in the commission of the offence, or(b) the offender had a bladed article or offensive weapon with them when the offence was committed.(4) The condition in this subsection is that the court is satisfied on the balance of probabilities that—(a) a bladed article or offensive weapon was used by another person in the commission of the offence and the offender knew or ought to have known that this would be the case, or(b) another person who committed the offence had a bladed article or offensive weapon with them when the offence was committed and the offender knew or ought to have known that this would be the case.(5) The condition in this subsection is that the court considers it necessary to make a serious violence reduction order in respect of the offender to—(a) protect the public in England and Wales from the risk of harm involving a bladed article or offensive weapon,(b) protect any particular members of the public in England and Wales (including the offender) from such risk, or(c) prevent the offender from committing an offence involving a bladed article or offensive weapon.(6) The court may make a serious violence reduction order in respect of the offender only if it—(a) does so in addition to dealing with the offender for the offence, and(b) does not make an order for absolute discharge under section 79 in respect of the offence.(7) For the purpose of deciding whether to make a serious violence reduction order the court may consider evidence led by the prosecution and evidence led by the offender.(8) It does not matter whether the evidence would have been admissible in the proceedings in which the offender was convicted.(9) The court may adjourn any proceedings on an application for a serious violence reduction order even after sentencing the offender.(10) If the offender does not appear for any adjourned proceedings the court may—(a) further adjourn the proceedings,(b) issue a warrant for the offender’s arrest, or(c) hear the proceedings in the offender’s absence.(a) 
182	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 10 – Management of offendersCHAPTER 1A – Serious violence reduction ordersDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(11) The court may not act under subsection (10)(b) unless it is satisfied that the offender has had adequate notice of the time and place of the adjourned proceedings.(12) The court may not act under subsection (10)(c) unless it is satisfied that the offender—(a) has had adequate notice of the time and place of the adjourned proceedings, and(b) has been informed that if the offender does not appear for those proceedings the court may hear the proceedings in the offender’s absence.(13) On making a serious violence reduction order the court must in ordinary language explain to the offender—(a) the effects of the order, and(b) the powers that a constable has in respect of the offender under section 342E while the order is in effect.(14) In subsection (1)(a) “the first appointed day” means the first day appointed by regulations under section 208(1) of the Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 for the coming into force to any extent of section 165 of that Act.(15) In subsection (4) the references to the offence include references to any offence arising out of the same facts as the offence.342B Meaning of “serious violence reduction order”(1) In this Chapter, “serious violence reduction order” means an order made in respect of an offender that imposes on the offender—(a) the requirements specified in subsections (2) and (4), and(b) the requirements and prohibitions, if any, specified in regulations made by the Secretary of State for the purposes of this section.(2) The offender must be required to notify the information in subsection (3) to the police within the period of 3 days beginning with the day on which the order takes effect.(3) That information is—(a) the offender’s name on the day that the notification is given and, where the offender uses one or more other names on that day, each of those names,(b) the offender’s home address on that day, and(c) the address of any other premises at which, on that day, the offender regularly resides or stays.(4) The offender must be required to notify the information mentioned in subsection (5) to the police within the period of 3 days beginning with the day on which the offender—(a) uses a name which has not been previously notified to the police in accordance with the order,(b) changes their home address, or(a) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32) PART 10 – Management of offendersCHAPTER 1A – Serious violence reduction orders Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
183
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(c) decides to live for a period of one month or more at any premises the address of which has not been previously notified to the police in accordance with the order.(5) That information is—(a) in a case within subsection (4)(a), the name which has not previously been notified,(b) in a case within subsection (4)(b), the new home address, and(c) in a case within subsection (4)(c), the address of the premises at which the offender has decided to live.(6) A serious violence reduction order must provide that the offender gives a notification of the kind mentioned in subsection (2) or (4) by—(a) attending at a police station in a police area in which the offender lives, and(b) giving an oral notification to a police officer, or to any person authorised for the purpose by the officer in charge of the station.(7) The Secretary of State may make regulations under subsection (1)(b) only if—(a) the Secretary of State has laid a report before Parliament under section 166(3) of the Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (report to be laid after piloting of serious violence reduction orders), and(b) the Secretary of State considers that it is appropriate to make the regulations for the purpose of assisting constables to exercise the powers conferred by section 342E.(8) Regulations under subsection (1)(b) are subject to the affirmative resolution procedure.(9) In this section, “home address”, in relation to the offender, means—(a) the address of the offender’s sole or main residence, or(b) if the offender has no such residence, the address or location of a place where the offender can regularly be found and, if there is more than one such place, such one of those places as the offender may select.342C Serious violence reduction orders: additional requirements etc(1) A serious violence reduction order may impose on the offender any requirement or prohibition specified in regulations made by the Secretary of State for the purposes of this section if the condition in subsection (2) is met.(2) The condition in this subsection is that the court considers it appropriate for the order to impose the requirement or prohibition on the offender for the purpose of assisting constables to exercise the powers conferred by section 342E in respect of the offender.(3) Regulations under this section may be made only after the Secretary of State has laid a report before Parliament under section 166(3) of the Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (report to be laid after piloting of serious violence reduction orders).(4) Regulations under this section are subject to the affirmative resolution procedure.(1) 
184	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 10 – Management of offendersCHAPTER 1A – Serious violence reduction ordersDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes342D Duration of serious violence reduction orders(1) A serious violence reduction order takes effect on the day it is made, subject to subsections (3) and (4).(2) A serious violence reduction order must specify the period for which it has effect, which must be a fixed period of not less than 6 months and not more than 2 years.(3) Subsection (4) applies in relation to a serious violence reduction order if—(a) the offender has been remanded in or committed to custody by an order of a court, or(b) a custodial sentence has been imposed on the offender or the offender is serving or otherwise subject to a such a sentence.(4) The order may provide that it does not take effect until the offender is released from custody or ceases to be subject to a custodial sentence.(5) Where a court makes a serious violence reduction order and the offender is already subject to such an order, the earlier order ceases to have effect.342E Serious violence reduction orders: powers of constables(1) This section applies where a serious violence reduction order is in effect.(2) A constable may search the offender for the purpose of ascertaining whether the offender has a bladed article or an offensive weapon with them.(3) A constable may detain the offender for the purpose of carrying out the search.(4) A constable may seize anything that the constable finds in the course of the search if the constable reasonably suspects it to be a bladed article or an offensive weapon.(5) The powers in this section may be exercised only while the offender is in a public place.(6) A constable may use reasonable force, if necessary, for the purpose of exercising a power conferred by this section.(7) The powers conferred on a constable by this section are additional to powers which the constable has at common law or by virtue of any other enactment and does not affect those powers.342F Retention and disposal of things seized under section 342E(1) Any thing seized by a constable under section 342E may be retained in accordance with regulations made by the Secretary of State under this section.(2) The Secretary of State may by regulations make provision—(a) regulating the retention and safekeeping of things seized by a constable under section 342E, and(b) regulating the disposal and destruction of such things in such circumstances as the regulations may prescribed.(a) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32) PART 10 – Management of offendersCHAPTER 1A – Serious violence reduction orders Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
185
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(3) Regulations under this section are subject to the negative resolution procedure.342G Offences relating to a serious violence reduction order(1) Where a serious violence reduction order is in effect, the offender commits an offence if the offender—(a) fails without reasonable excuse to do anything the offender is required to do by the order,(b) without reasonable excuse does anything the offender is prohibited from doing by the order,(c) notifies to the police, in purported compliance with the order, any information which the offender knows to be false,(d) tells a constable that they are not subject to a serious violence reduction order, or(e) intentionally obstructs a constable in the exercise of any power conferred by section 342E.(2) A person guilty of an offence under this section is liable—(a) on summary conviction, to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 12 months, or a fine, or both;(b) on conviction on indictment, to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 2 years, or a fine, or both.(3) In relation to an offence committed before the coming into force of paragraph 24(2) of Schedule 22 (maximum sentence that may be imposed on summary conviction of offence triable either way) the reference in subsection (2)(a) to 12 months is to be read as a reference to 6 months.(4) If a person is convicted of an offence under this section, an order for conditional discharge under section 80 is not available to the court by or before which the person is convicted.342H Variation, renewal or discharge of serious violence reduction order(1) A person within subsection (2) may apply to the appropriate court for an order varying, renewing or discharging a serious violence reduction order.(2) Those persons are—(a) the offender;(b) the chief officer of police for the police area in which the offender lives;(c) the chief officer of police for the police area in which the offender committed the offence on the basis of which the order was made;(d) a chief officer of police who believes that the offender is in, or is intending to come to, the chief officer’s police area;(e) where the offence on the basis of which the order was made is an offence to which this paragraph applies, the chief constable of the British Transport Police Force.(3) Paragraph (e) of subsection (2) applies to an offence which—(2) 
186	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 10 – Management of offendersCHAPTER 1A – Serious violence reduction ordersDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(a) was committed at, or in relation to, a place within section 31(1)(a) to (f) of the Railways and Transport Safety Act 2003 (jurisdiction of British Transport Police Force), or(b) otherwise related to a railway within the meaning given by section 67 of the Transport and Works Act 1992 or a tramway within the meaning given by that section.(4) An application under this section must be made in accordance with rules of court.(5) Before making a decision on an application under this section, the court must hear—(a) the person making the application, and(b) any other person within subsection (2) who wishes to be heard.(6) Subject to subsection (7), on an application under this section the court may make such order varying, renewing or discharging the serious violence reduction order as it thinks appropriate.(7) The court may renew a serious violence reduction order, or vary such an order so as to lengthen its duration, only if it considers that to do so is necessary—(a) to protect the public in England and Wales from the risk of harm involving a bladed article or offensive weapon,(b) to protect any particular members of the public in England and Wales (including the offender) from such risk, or(c) to prevent the offender from committing an offence involving a bladed article or offensive weapon.(8) On making an order under this section varying or renewing a serious violence reduction order, the court must in ordinary language explain to the offender—(a) the effects of the serious violence reduction order (as varied or renewed), and(b) the powers that a constable has in respect of the offender under section 342E while the serious violence reduction order is in effect.(9) In this section the “appropriate court” means—(a) where the Crown Court or the Court of Appeal made the serious violence reduction order, the Crown Court;(b) where a magistrates’ court made the serious violence reduction order and the application is made by the offender or the chief constable of the British Transport Police Force—(i) that magistrates’ court, or(ii) a magistrates’ court for the area in which the offender lives;(c) where a magistrates’ court made the serious violence reduction order and the application is made by a chief officer of police—(i) that magistrates’ court,(ii) a magistrates’ court for the area in which the offender lives, or(iii) a magistrates’ court acting for a local justice area that includes any part of the chief officer’s police area.(i) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32) PART 10 – Management of offendersCHAPTER 1A – Serious violence reduction orders Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
187
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes342I Appeal against serious violence reduction order etc(1) An appeal against the making of a serious violence reduction order may be brought by the offender as if the order were a sentence passed on the offender for an offence.(2) Where an application is made under section 342H for an order varying, renewing or discharging a serious violence reduction order—(a) the person who made the application may appeal against a refusal to make an order under that section;(b) the offender may appeal against the making of an order under that section which was made on the application of a chief officer of police or the chief constable of the British Transport Police Force;(c) a chief officer of police within subsection (2) of that section may appeal against the making of an order under that section which was made on the application of the offender;(d) where the offence on the basis of which the serious violence reduction order was made is an offence to which this paragraph applies, the chief constable of the British Transport Police Force may appeal against the making of an order under that section which was made on the application of the offender.(3) Paragraph (d) of subsection (2) applies to an offence which—(a) was committed at, or in relation to, a place within section 31(1)(a) to (f) of the Railways and Transport Safety Act 2003 (jurisdiction of British Transport Police Force), or(b) otherwise related to a railway within the meaning given by section 67 of the Transport and Works Act 1992 or a tramway within the meaning given by that section.(4) An appeal under subsection (2)—(a) is to be made to the Court of Appeal if the application under section 342H was made to the Crown Court;(b) is to be made to the Crown Court in any other case.(5) On an appeal under subsection (2) to the Crown Court, the court may make—(a) such orders as may be necessary to give effect to its determination of the appeal, and(b) such incidental and consequential orders as appear to it to be appropriate.342J Guidance(1) The Secretary of State may issue guidance to—(a) constables,(b) chief officers of police, and  (c) the chief constable of the British Transport Police Force, in relation to serious violence reduction orders.(2) The guidance may in particular include—(1) 
188	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 10 – Management of offendersCHAPTER 1A – Serious violence reduction ordersDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(a) guidance about the exercise by constables, chief officers of police and the chief constable of the British Transport Police Force of their functions under this Chapter,(b) guidance about identifying offenders in respect of whom it may be appropriate for applications for serious violence reduction orders to be made, and(c) guidance about providing assistance to prosecutors in connection with applications for serious violence reduction orders.(3) The Secretary of State may revise any guidance issued under this section.(4) The Secretary of State must arrange for any guidance issued under this section to be published.(5) A constable, chief officer of police or the chief constable of the British Transport Police Force must have regard to any guidance issued under this section.342K Guidance: Parliamentary procedure(1) Before issuing guidance under section 342J, the Secretary of State must lay a draft of the guidance before Parliament.(2) If, within the 40-day period, either House of Parliament resolves not to approve the draft guidance, the guidance may not be issued.(3) If no such resolution is made within that period, the Secretary of State may issue the guidance.(4) In this section “the 40-day period”, in relation to draft guidance, means the period of 40 days beginning with the day on which the draft is laid before Parliament (or, if it is not laid before each House on the same day, the later of the days on which it is laid).(5) In calculating the 40-day period, no account is to be taken of any period during which—(a) Parliament is dissolved or prorogued, or(b) both Houses are adjourned for more than 4 days.342L Serious violence reduction orders: interpretationIn this Chapter—  “bladed article” means an article to which section 139 of the Criminal Justice Act 1988 applies;  “custodial sentence” includes a pre-Code custodial sentence (see section 222(4));“harm” includes physical and psychological harm;  “offensive weapon” has the same meaning as in section 1(4) of the Prevention of Crime Act 1953;“public place” means—(a) any place to which the public or any section of the public has access, on payment or otherwise, as of right or by virtue of express or implied permission, or(a) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32) PART 10 – Management of offendersCHAPTER 1A – Serious violence reduction orders Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
189
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(b) any other place to which people have ready access but which is not a dwelling;  “the offender”, in relation to a serious violence reduction order, means the offender in respect of whom the order or the application for the order has been made.”(2) In section 80(3) of the Sentencing Code (list of circumstances where an order for conditional discharge is not available) after paragraph (d) insert—“(da)	section 342G(4) (offences relating to a serious violence reduction order);”.(3) In section 3(2) of the Prosecution of Offences Act 1985 (functions of the Director of Public Prosecutions) after paragraph (fg) insert—“(fh)	to have the conduct of applications for orders under section 342A of the Sentencing Code (serious violence reduction orders);”.166 Serious violence reduction orders: piloting(1) The Secretary of State may exercise the power in section 208(1) so as to bring section 165 into force—(a) for all purposes, and  (b) in relation to the whole of England and Wales, only if the conditions in subsections (2) and (3) are met.(2) The condition in this subsection is that regulations under section 208(1) have brought section 165 into force only—(a) for one or more specified purposes, or(b) in relation to one or more specified areas.(3) The condition in this subsection is that the Secretary of State has laid before Parliament a report on the operation of Chapter 1A of Part 11 of the Sentencing Code (inserted by section 165)—(a) for one or more of those purposes, or(b) in relation to one or more of those areas.(4) A report under subsection (3) must in particular include—(a) information about the number of offenders in respect of whom serious violence reduction orders have been made;(b) information about the offences that were the basis for applications as a result of which serious violence reduction orders were made;(a) 
190	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 10 – Management of offendersCHAPTER 2 – Knife crime prevention orders Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(c) information about the exercise by constables of the powers in section 342E of the Sentencing Code (serious violence reduction orders: powers of constables);(d) an assessment of the impact of the operation of Chapter 1A of Part 11 of the Sentencing Code on people with protected characteristics (within the meaning of the Equality Act 2010);(e) an initial assessment of the impact of serious violence reduction orders on the reoffending rates of offenders in respect of whom such orders have been made;(f) an assessment of the impact on offenders of being subject to a serious violence reduction order;(g) information about the number of offences committed under section 342G of the Sentencing Code (offences relating to a serious violence reduction order) and the number of suspected offences under that section that have been investigated.(5) Regulations under section 208(1) which bring section 165 into force only for a specified purpose or in relation to a specified area may—(a) provide for section 165 to be in force for that purpose or in relation to that area for a specified period;(b) make transitional or saving provision in connection with section 165 ceasing to be in force at the end of the specified period.(6) Regulations containing provision by virtue of subsection (5)(a) may be amended by subsequent regulations under section 208(1) so as to continue section 165 in force—(a) for the specified purpose, or  (b) in relation to the specified area, for a further specified period.(7) Accordingly, the reference in section 419(1) of the Sentencing Act 2020, as applied by section 206, to the coming into force of an amendment is to be read as including a reference to the continuing in force of an amendment by reason of subsection (6).(8) In this section—  “serious violence reduction order” has the same meaning as in Chapter 1A of Part 11 of the Sentencing Code (see section 342B of the Sentencing Code);“specified” means specified in regulations under section 208(1).CHAPTER 2KNIFE CRIME PREVENTION ORDERS167 Knife crime prevention order on conviction: adjournment of proceedings(1) In section 19 of the Offensive Weapons Act 2019 (knife crime prevention orders made on conviction), after subsection (9) insert—(1) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32) PART 10 – Management of offendersCHAPTER 3 – Management of sex offenders Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
191
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes“(9A) The court may adjourn any proceedings on an application for a knife crime prevention order even after sentencing the defendant.(9B) If the defendant does not appear for any adjourned proceedings the court may—(a) further adjourn the proceedings,(b) issue a warrant for the defendant’s arrest, or(c) hear the proceedings in the defendant’s absence.(9C) The court may not act under subsection (9B)(b) unless it is satisfied that the defendant has had adequate notice of the time and place of the adjourned proceedings.(9D) The court may not act under subsection (9B)(c) unless it is satisfied that the defendant—(a) has had adequate notice of the time and place of the adjourned proceedings, and(b) has been informed that if the defendant does not appear for those proceedings the court may hear the proceedings in the defendant’s absence.”(2) Regulations under section 208(1) which bring subsection (1) into force only for a specified purpose or in relation to a specified area may—(a) provide for that provision to be in force for that purpose or in relation to that area for a specified period;(b) make transitional or saving provision in relation to that provision ceasing to be in force at the end of the specified period.(3) Regulations containing provision by virtue of subsection (2)(a) may be amended by subsequent regulations under section 208(1) so as to continue subsection (1) in force for the specified purpose or in relation to the specified area for a further specified period.(4) In this section “specified” means specified in regulations under section 208(1).CHAPTER 3MANAGEMENT OF SEX OFFENDERSNotification requirements168 Locations for sexual offender notification(1) Section 87 of the Sexual Offences Act 2003 (method of notification and related matters) is amended as follows.(1) 
192	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 10 – Management of offendersCHAPTER 3 – Management of sex offenders Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(2) For paragraph (a) of subsection (1) substitute—“(a) attending at the police station in the person’s local police area that is for the time being specified in a document published for that local police area under this section or, if there is more than one such police station, at any one of them, and”.(3) After subsection (2) insert—“(2A) The chief officer of police for each police area must publish, in such manner as the chief officer thinks fit, a document containing the name and address of each police station in that area at which a person may give a notification under section 83(1), 84(1) or 85(1).(2B) A chief officer of police must keep under review a document published by the chief officer under this section and may from time to time publish a revised version of the document in such manner as the chief officer thinks fit.”169 Offences outside the United Kingdom: notification requirements(1) The Sexual Offences Act 2003 is amended as follows.(2) After section 96 insert—“Offences outside the United Kingdom: notification requirements96ZA Offences outside the United Kingdom: notification requirements(1) Where this section applies to a person (“P”), P is subject to the notification requirements of this Part for the notification period set out in section 82.This is subject to sections 96ZB (young offenders: parental notices) and 96ZC (modifications of notification requirements).(2) This section applies to P if P has been given a notice under subsection (3) and that notice has not been cancelled.(3) A constable may give a notice to P if—(a) the conditions in subsections (6), (7) and (8) are met in respect of P, and(b) an officer of at least the rank of inspector has authorised the giving of the notice to P.(4) A notice given to P under subsection (3) must be given to P in person and must contain details of—(a) the notifications that P is required to give under this Part,(b) when those notifications must be given, and(c) where those notifications may be given.(a) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32) PART 10 – Management of offendersCHAPTER 3 – Management of sex offenders Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
193
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(5) A notice given under subsection (3) may be cancelled by a constable giving notice in writing to P in person but such a cancellation must be authorised by an officer of at least the rank of inspector.(6) The first condition is that under the law in force in a country outside the United Kingdom—(a) P has been convicted of a relevant offence (whether or not P has been punished for it),(b) a court exercising jurisdiction under that law has made in respect of a relevant offence a finding equivalent to a finding that P is not guilty by reason of insanity,(c) such a court has made in respect of a relevant offence a finding equivalent to a finding that P is under a disability and did the act charged against P in respect of the offence, or(d) P has been cautioned in respect of a relevant offence.(7) The second condition is that—(a) the first condition is met because of a conviction, finding or caution which occurred on or after 1 September 1997,(b) the first condition is met because of a conviction or finding which occurred before that date, but P was dealt with in respect of the offence or finding on or after that date, or has yet to be dealt with in respect of it, or(c) the first condition is met because of a conviction or finding which occurred before that date, but on that date P was, in respect of the offence or finding, subject under the law in force in the country concerned to detention, supervision or any other disposal equivalent to any of those mentioned in section 81(3) (read with sections 81(6) and 131).(8) The third condition is that the period set out in section 82 (as it would have effect as modified by section 96ZC(2) and (3) if this section applied to P) in respect of the relevant offence has not expired.(9) In this section and section 96ZC “relevant offence” means an act which—(a) constituted an offence under the law in force in the country concerned, and(b) would have constituted an offence listed in Schedule 3 (other than at paragraph 60) if it had been done in any part of the United Kingdom.(10) For the purposes of subsection (9)(a), an act punishable under the law in force in a country outside the United Kingdom constitutes an offence under that law however it is described in that law.96ZB Young offenders: parental notices(1) Where the person (“P”) given a notice under section 96ZA is under 18 a constable may also give a notice (a “parental notice”) to a person (“the parent”) with parental responsibility for P.(2) Subsections (3)(b) to (5) of section 96ZA apply to the giving of a parental notice as if references to P were references to the parent.(1) 
194	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 10 – Management of offendersCHAPTER 3 – Management of sex offenders Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(3) If a parental notice has been given to the parent and has not been cancelled or ceased to have effect—(a) the obligations that would (apart from this subsection) be imposed by virtue of section 96ZA on P are to be treated instead as obligations on the parent, and(b) the parent must ensure that P attends with them at the police station when a notification under this Part is being given.(4) The parental notice ceases to have effect when P reaches the age of 18.(5) If a parental notice is to be given, section 96ZA(4)(a) has effect in relation to the notice given to P as if the reference to the notifications that P is required to give under this Part were a reference to—(a) the notifications that the parent is required to give under this Part, and(b) the notifications (if any) that P is required to give under this Part once the parental notice ceases to have effect.96ZC Modifications of notification requirements(1) The application of this Part to a person (“P”) to whom section 96ZA applies in respect of a conviction, finding or caution is subject to the modifications set out in this section.(2) References to the “relevant date”—(a) in a case where P is within section 96ZA(6)(a), are to the date of the conviction,(b) in a case where P is within section 96ZA(6)(b) or (c), are to the date of the finding, and(c) in a case where P is within section 96ZA(6)(d), are to the date of the caution.(3) In section 82—(a) references, except in the Table, to a person (or relevant offender) within any provision of section 80 are to be read as references to P;(b) the reference in the Table to section 80(1)(d) is to be read as a reference to section 96ZA(6)(d);(c) references to an order of any description are to be read as references to any corresponding disposal made in relation to P in respect of an offence or finding by reference to which a notice has been given to P under section 96ZA;(d) the reference to offences listed in Schedule 3 is to be read as a reference to relevant offences (see section 96ZA(9)).(4) Section 83 has effect as if after subsection (1) there were inserted—“(1A) In the case of a relevant offender who is subject to the notification requirements of this Part by virtue of a notice being given to the relevant offender under section 96ZA, the reference in subsection (1) to the period of 3 days beginning with the relevant date (or if later the commencement of this Part) is to be read as a reference to the period of 3 days beginning with the day on which the notice was given to the relevant offender.”
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32) PART 10 – Management of offendersCHAPTER 3 – Management of sex offenders Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
195
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(5) Section 83(4) has effect as if—(a) for the words “Where a notification order is made” there were substituted “Where a relevant offender is subject to the notification requirements of this Part by virtue of a notice given under section 96ZA”, and(b) in paragraph (a) for the words “the order was made” there were substituted “the notice was given to the relevant offender”.96ZD Appeal against the issue of a notice under section 96ZA or 96ZB(1) A person (“P”) may appeal to a magistrates’ court against the decision to give them a notice under section 96ZA.(2) The grounds for bringing an appeal under subsection (1) include—(a) that one or more of the conditions for the giving of the notice were not met in respect of P at the time the notice was given;(b) that the conviction, finding or caution by reason of which P was given the notice falls within subsection (3).(3) A conviction, finding or caution falls within this subsection if—(a) any investigations or proceedings leading to it were conducted in a way which contravened any of the Convention rights (within the meaning of section 1 of the Human Rights Act 1998) which P would have had if those investigations or proceedings had taken place in the United Kingdom, and(b) that contravention was such that the conviction, finding or caution cannot be safely relied on for the purposes of meeting the condition in section 96ZA(6).(4) A person (“the parent”) may appeal to a magistrates’ court against the decision to give them a parental notice under section 96ZB.(5) The grounds for bringing an appeal under subsection (4) include—(a) that one or more of the conditions for the giving of a notice under section 96ZA to the person (“P”) for whom the parent has parental responsibility were not met in respect of P at the time the notice under section 96ZA was given;(b) that the conviction, finding or caution by reason of which P was given a notice under section 96ZA falls within subsection (3);(c) that one or more of the requirements for giving the parent a parental notice under section 96ZB were not met at the time the parental notice was given.(6) On an appeal under subsection (1) or (4) a magistrates’ court may cancel or confirm the notice which is the subject of the appeal.”(3) In section 91(1)(a) (offences relating to notification) for “or 89(2)(b)” substitute “, 89(2)(b) or 96ZB(3)(b)”.(4) In section 91A(3) (review of indefinite notification requirements) for paragraph (c) substitute—“(c)	a notice given under section 96ZA.”
196	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 10 – Management of offendersCHAPTER 3 – Management of sex offenders Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(5) Omit sections 97 to 103 (notification orders) and section 103G(6) and (7) (notification order made on application for sexual harm prevention order or interim sexual harm prevention order).(6) In section 133(1) (general interpretation), in the definition of “relevant date” for “98, 100” substitute “, 96ZC”.(7) Subsection (5) does not affect—(a) the validity or effect of any order made under section 97 or 100 of the Sexual Offences Act 2003 before the coming into force of this section or the application of Part 2 of that Act to any person in respect of whom such an order was so made;(b) in respect of an application made under section 97(1) or section 100(2) of that Act before the coming into force of this section—(i) the determination of such an application, or(ii) the validity and effect of any order made on such an application or the application of Part 2 of that Act to any person in respect of whom such an order was so made.(8) The amendments made by subsections (4) and (6) do not apply in respect of any order to which, or any person to whom, subsection (7) applies.170 Notification orders: Scotland(1) The Sexual Offences Act 2003 is amended as follows.(2) In section 97 (notification orders: applications and grounds)—(a) in subsection (1), in the words before paragraph (a)—(i) for the words from “A chief officer of police” to “police area” substitute “The chief constable of the Police Service of Scotland (“the chief constable”) may by application to any sheriff”, and(ii) omit “(“the defendant”)”,(b) in subsection (1)(a)—(i) for “him” substitute “the chief constable”, and(ii) for “defendant” substitute “person”,(c) in subsection (1)(b)—(i) for “defendant”, in both places it occurs, substitute “person”,(ii) for “his police area”, in both places it occurs, substitute “Scotland”, and(iii) for “chief officer” substitute “chief constable”,(d) in subsection (2)—(i) for “he”, in each place it occurs, substitute “the person”, and(ii) in paragraph (c), for “him” substitute “the person”,(e) in subsection (5) for “court” substitute “sheriff”, and(a) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32) PART 10 – Management of offendersCHAPTER 3 – Management of sex offenders Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
197
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(f) after subsection (5) insert—“(5A) A record of evidence must be kept on any application for an order under this section.(5B) The clerk of the court by which a notification order under this section is made must cause a copy of the order as so made to be—(a) given to the person named in the order,(b) sent to the person by registered post, or(c) sent to the person by the recorded delivery service,and where a copy of the order is so sent to the person, an acknowledgement or certificate of delivery issued by the Post Office is sufficient evidence of the delivery of the copy on the day specified in the acknowledgement or certificate.”(3) In section 98 (notification orders: effect)—(a) in subsections (1)(a) and (3)(a) and (c) for “defendant” substitute “person in respect of whom the order has effect”, and(b) in subsection (1)(b) for “defendant” substitute “person”.(4) In section 99 (sections 97 and 98: relevant offences), in subsections (3) and (4), for “defendant” substitute “person in respect of whom the order is sought”.(5) In section 100 (interim notification orders)—(a) in subsection (2)—(i) in paragraph (a), omit “the complaint containing”, and(ii) in paragraph (b), for “by complaint to the court to which that application has been made” substitute “by further application to the sheriff to whom the main application has been made”,(b) in subsection (5)—(i) in paragraph (a), for “defendant” substitute “person in respect of whom the order has effect”, and(ii) in paragraph (b), for “defendant” substitute “person”,(c) in subsection (7)—(i) for “defendant” substitute “person in respect of whom the order has effect”, and(ii) for “complaint” substitute “application”, and(d) after subsection (7) insert—“(7A) A record of evidence must be kept on any application for an order under this section.(7B) The clerk of the court by which an interim notification order is made, varied, renewed or discharged under this section must cause a copy of, as the case may be—(a) the order as so made, varied or renewed, or(b) the interlocutor by which discharge is effected,to be given to the person named in the order or to be sent to the person in accordance with subsection (7C).(7C) A copy of the order may be sent to the person named in the order—(a) by registered post, or(a) 
198	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 10 – Management of offendersCHAPTER 3 – Management of sex offenders Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(b) by the recorded delivery service,and where a copy of the order is so sent to the person, an acknowledgement or certificate of delivery issued by the Post Office is sufficient evidence of the delivery of the copy on the day specified in the acknowledgement or certificate.”(6) Omit sections 101 (notification orders and interim notification orders: appeals in England and Wales) and 103 (sections 97 to 100: Scotland).Sexual harm prevention orders and sexual risk orders171 Applications by British Transport Police and Ministry of Defence Police(1) The Sexual Offences Act 2003 is amended as follows.(2) Section 103A (sexual harm prevention orders: applications and grounds) is amended in accordance with subsections (3) to (6).(3) In subsection (4), for the words before paragraph (a) substitute “A person mentioned in subsection (4A) (“the applicant”) may by complaint to a magistrates’ court apply for a sexual harm prevention order in respect of a person if it appears to the applicant that—”.(4) After subsection (4) insert— “(4A) Those persons are—(a) a chief officer of police;(b) the Director General of the National Crime Agency (“the Director General”);(c) the chief constable of the British Transport Police Force;(d) the chief constable of the Ministry of Defence Police.”(5) For subsection (7) substitute—“(7) If the Director General, the chief constable of the British Transport Police Force or the chief constable of the Ministry of Defence Police makes an application under subsection (4), that person must as soon as practicable notify the chief officer of police for a relevant police area of that application.”(6) In subsection (9)(b)—(a) in the words before sub-paragraph (i), after “the Director General” insert “, the chief constable of the British Transport Police Force or the chief constable of the Ministry of Defence Police”, and(b) in sub-paragraph (ii), for “Director General” substitute “applicant”.(7) In section 103F (interim sexual harm prevention orders), after subsection (6) (inserted by section 173 of this Act) insert—(1) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32) PART 10 – Management of offendersCHAPTER 3 – Management of sex offenders Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
199
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes“(7) If the Director General of the National Crime Agency, the chief constable of the British Transport Police Force or the chief constable of the Ministry of Defence Police makes an application under this section, that person must as soon as practicable notify the chief officer of police for a relevant police area of that application.(8) In subsection (7), “relevant police area” has the same meaning as in section 103A (sexual harm prevention orders: applications and grounds) (see section 103A(9)).”(8) In section 103J(1) (sexual harm prevention orders and interim sexual harm prevention orders: guidance) for “chief officers of police and to the Director General of the National Crime Agency” substitute “chief officers of police, the Director General of the National Crime Agency, the chief constable of the British Transport Police Force and the chief constable of the Ministry of Defence Police”.(9) Section 122A (sexual risk orders: applications, grounds and effect) is amended in accordance with subsections (10) and (11).(10) For subsection (1) substitute—“(1) A person mentioned in subsection (1A) (“the applicant”) may by complaint to a magistrates’ court apply for an order under this section (a “sexual risk order”) in respect of a person (“the defendant”) if it appears to the applicant that the condition in subsection (2) is met.(1A) Those persons are—(a) a chief officer of police;(b) the Director General of the National Crime Agency (“the Director General”);(c) the chief constable of the British Transport Police Force;(d) the chief constable of the Ministry of Defence Police.”(11) For subsection (5) substitute—“(5) If the Director General, the chief constable of the British Transport Police Force or the chief constable of the Ministry of Defence Police makes an application under subsection (1), that person must as soon as practicable notify the chief officer of police for a relevant police area of that application.”(12) In section 122B(3)(b) (interpretation of section 122A)—(a) after “Agency” insert “, the chief constable of the British Transport Police Force or the chief constable for the Ministry of Defence Police”, and(b) in sub-paragraph (ii), for “Director General” substitute “applicant”.(13) In section 122E (interim sexual risk orders), after subsection (6) (inserted by section 173 of this Act) insert—“(7) If the Director General of the National Crime Agency, the chief constable of the British Transport Police Force or the chief constable of the Ministry of Defence Police makes an application under this section, that person must as soon as practicable notify the chief officer of police for a relevant police area of that application.
200	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 10 – Management of offendersCHAPTER 3 – Management of sex offenders Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(8) In subsection (7), “relevant police area” has the same meaning as in section 122A (sexual risk orders: applications, grounds and effect) (see section 122B(3)).”(14) In section 122J(1) (sexual risk orders and interim sexual risk orders: guidance) for “chief officers of police and to the Director General of the National Crime Agency” substitute “chief officers of police, the Director General of the National Crime Agency, the chief constable of the British Transport Police Force and the chief constable of the Ministry of Defence Police”.172 List of countries(1) The Secretary of State may—(a) prepare a list of countries and territories outside the United Kingdom in which the Secretary of State considers children are at a high risk of sexual abuse or sexual exploitation from United Kingdom nationals or United Kingdom residents, or(b) direct a relevant person to prepare a list of countries and territories outside the United Kingdom in which the relevant person considers children are at a high risk of sexual abuse or sexual exploitation from United Kingdom nationals or United Kingdom residents.(2) If a list is prepared by the Secretary of State, the Secretary of State must lay the list before Parliament.(3) If a list is prepared by a relevant person—(a) the relevant person must submit the list to the Secretary of State, and(b) the Secretary of State must lay the list before Parliament.(4) As soon as reasonably practicable after a list has been laid before Parliament, the person who prepared the list must publish it.(5) A list published under subsection (4) has effect for the purposes of—(a) section 346 of the Sentencing Code (exercise of power to make sexual harm prevention order),(b) section 350 of the Sentencing Code (sexual harm prevention orders: variations, renewals and discharges),(c) section 103A of the Sexual Offences Act 2003 (sexual harm prevention orders: applications and grounds),(d) section 103E of that Act (sexual harm prevention orders: variations, renewals and discharges),(e) section 103F of that Act (interim sexual harm prevention orders),(f) section 122A of that Act (sexual risk orders: applications, grounds and effect),(g) section 122D of that Act (sexual risk orders: variations, renewals and discharges),(h) section 122E of that Act (interim sexual risk orders),(a) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32) PART 10 – Management of offendersCHAPTER 3 – Management of sex offenders Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
201
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(i) section 136ZG of that Act (variation of sexual harm prevention order made in Scotland by court in England and Wales),(j) section 136ZH of that Act (variation of sexual offences prevention order or foreign travel order by court in England and Wales), and(k) section 136ZI of that Act (variation of sexual risk order made in Scotland by court in England and Wales).(6) If a list has been published, the person who prepared it must keep it under review and may, from time to time, prepare a revised list (but see subsections (7) and (8)).(7) If the function under subsection (6) is for the time being exercisable by the Secretary of State, the Secretary of State may direct a relevant person to exercise that function.(8) If the function under subsection (6) is for the time being exercisable by a relevant person, the Secretary of State may direct that the function is to be exercisable by another relevant person or by the Secretary of State.(9) A list published under this section may at any time be withdrawn by the Secretary of State.(10) Subsections (2) to (9) apply to a revised list as they apply to a list prepared under subsection (1).(11) In this section—“child” means a person under 18;“relevant person” means a person whose statutory functions relate to—(a) the prevention or detection of crime, or(b) other law enforcement purposes; “United Kingdom national” means—(a) a British citizen, a British overseas territories citizen, a British National (Overseas) or a British Overseas citizen,(b) a person who under the British Nationality Act 1981 is a British subject, or(c) a British protected person within the meaning of that Act;  “United Kingdom resident” means an individual who is resident in the United Kingdom.173 Requirement for courts and certain persons to have regard to the list of countries(1) In section 346 of the Sentencing Code (exercise of power to make sexual harm prevention order)—(a) the existing text becomes subsection (1), and(a) 
202	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 10 – Management of offendersCHAPTER 3 – Management of sex offenders Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(b) after that subsection insert—“(2) If a list has been published under section 172 of the Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (list of countries where children are at a high risk of sexual abuse or sexual exploitation) and has not been withdrawn, the court must have regard to the list in considering—(a) whether a sexual harm prevention order is necessary for the purpose of protecting children generally, or any particular children, from sexual harm from the offender outside the United Kingdom, and(b) in particular, whether a prohibition on foreign travel (see section 348) is necessary for that purpose.”(2) In section 350 of the Sentencing Code (sexual harm prevention orders: variations, renewals and discharges)—(a) after subsection (3) insert—“(3A) If a list has been published under section 172 of the Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (list of countries where children are at high risk of sexual abuse or sexual exploitation) and has not been withdrawn, a person mentioned in subsection (2)(b) or (c) must have regard to the list in considering—(a) whether to apply for an order varying or renewing a sexual harm prevention order for the purpose of protecting children generally, or any particular children, from sexual harm from the offender outside the United Kingdom, and(b) in particular, whether to apply for an order imposing, varying or renewing a prohibition on foreign travel for that purpose.”, and(b) after subsection (6A) (inserted by section 175) insert—“(6B) If a list has been published under section 172 of the Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 and has not been withdrawn, the court must have regard to the list in considering—(a) whether an order varying or renewing the sexual harm prevention order is necessary for the purpose of protecting children generally, or any particular children, from sexual harm from the offender outside the United Kingdom, and(b) in particular, whether an order imposing, varying or renewing a prohibition on foreign travel is necessary for that purpose.”(3) The Sexual Offences Act 2003 is amended as follows.(4) In section 103A (sexual harm prevention orders: applications and grounds)—(a) after subsection (3) insert—“(3A) If a list has been published under section 172 of the Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (list of countries where children are at high risk of sexual abuse or sexual exploitation) and has not been withdrawn, the court must have regard to the list in considering—(a) whether a sexual harm prevention order is necessary for the purpose of protecting children generally, or any particular(a) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32) PART 10 – Management of offendersCHAPTER 3 – Management of sex offenders Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
203
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changeschildren, from sexual harm from the defendant outside the United Kingdom, and(b) in particular, whether a prohibition on foreign travel (see section 103D) is necessary for that purpose.”, and(b) after subsection (4A) (inserted by section 171) insert—“(4B) If a list has been published under section 172 of the Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 and has not been withdrawn, a person mentioned in subsection (4A) must have regard to the list in considering—(a) whether a person has since the appropriate date acted in such a way as to give reasonable cause to believe that it is necessary for a sexual harm prevention order to be made for the purpose of protecting children generally, or any particular children, from sexual harm from that person outside the United Kingdom, and(b) whether to apply for a prohibition on foreign travel (see section 103D) to be included in any such order for that purpose.”(5) In section 103E (sexual harm prevention orders: variations, renewals and discharges)—(a) after subsection (2) insert—“(2A) If a list has been published under section 172 of the Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (list of countries where children are at high risk of sexual abuse or sexual exploitation) and has not been withdrawn, a person mentioned in subsection (2)(b) to (d) must have regard to the list in considering—(a) whether to apply for an order varying or renewing a sexual harm prevention order for the purpose of protecting children generally, or any particular children, from sexual harm from the defendant outside the United Kingdom, and(b) in particular, whether to apply for an order imposing, varying or renewing a prohibition on foreign travel for that purpose.”,(b) after subsection (5A) (inserted by section 175) insert—“(5B) If a list has been published under section 172 of the Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 and has not been withdrawn, the court must have regard to the list in considering—(a) whether any order varying or renewing the sexual harm prevention order is necessary for the purpose of protecting children generally, or any particular children, from sexual harm from the defendant outside the United Kingdom, and(b) in particular, whether an order imposing, varying or renewing a prohibition on foreign travel is necessary for that purpose.”, and(c) in subsection (6), for “subsection (5)” substitute “subsections (2A), (5) and (5B)”.(6) In section 103F (interim sexual harm prevention orders)—(a) after subsection (2) insert—(a) 
204	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 10 – Management of offendersCHAPTER 3 – Management of sex offenders Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes“(2A) If a list has been published under section 172 of the Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (list of countries where children are at high risk of sexual abuse or sexual exploitation) and has not been withdrawn, a person who has made, or is considering making, an application under section 103A(4) must have regard to the list in considering—(a) whether to apply for an interim sexual harm prevention order for the purpose of protecting children generally, or any particular children, from sexual harm from the defendant outside the United Kingdom, and(b) in particular, whether to apply for a prohibition on foreign travel to be included in any such order for that purpose.”,(b) after subsection (3) insert—“(3A) If a list has been published under section 172 of the Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 and has not been withdrawn, the court must have regard to the list in considering—(a) whether to make an interim sexual harm prevention order for the purpose of protecting children generally, or any particular children, from sexual harm from the defendant outside the United Kingdom, and(b) in particular, whether to include in any such order a prohibition on foreign travel for that purpose.”, and(c) after subsection (5) insert—“(6) Subsections (2A) and (3A) apply in relation to an application for the variation or renewal of an interim sexual harm prevention order as they apply in relation to an application for such an order.”(7) In section 122A (sexual risk orders: applications, grounds and effect)—(a) after subsection (2) insert—“(2A) If a list has been published under section 172 of the Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (list of countries where children are at high risk of sexual abuse or sexual exploitation) and has not been withdrawn, a person mentioned in subsection (1A) must have regard to the list in considering—(a) whether as a result of the act mentioned in subsection (2) there is reasonable cause to believe that it is necessary for a sexual risk order to be made for the purpose of protecting children generally, or any particular children, from harm from the defendant outside the United Kingdom, and(b) whether to apply for a prohibition on foreign travel (see section 122C) to be included in any such order for that purpose.”, and(b) after subsection (6) insert—“(6A) If a list has been published under section 172 of the Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 and has not been withdrawn, the court must have regard to the list in considering—
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32) PART 10 – Management of offendersCHAPTER 3 – Management of sex offenders Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
205
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(a) whether a sexual risk order is necessary for the purpose of protecting children generally, or any particular children, from harm from the defendant outside the United Kingdom, and(b) in particular, whether a prohibition on foreign travel (see section 122C) is necessary for that purpose.”(8) In section 122D (sexual risk order: variations, renewals and discharges),(a) after subsection (2) insert—“(2A) If a list has been published under section 172 of the Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (list of countries where children are at high risk of sexual abuse or sexual exploitation) and has not been withdrawn, a person mentioned in subsection (2)(b) to (d) must have regard to the list in considering—(a) whether to apply for an order varying or renewing a sexual risk order for the purpose of protecting children generally, or any particular children, from harm from the defendant outside the United Kingdom, and(b) in particular, whether to apply for an order imposing, varying or renewing a prohibition on foreign travel for that purpose.”,(b) in subsection (3) for “the application” substitute “an application made under this section”, and(c) after subsection (4A) (inserted by section 176) insert—“(4B) If a list has been published under section 172 of the Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 and has not been withdrawn, the court must have regard to the list in considering—(a) whether any order varying or renewing the sexual risk order is necessary for the purposes of protecting children generally, or any particular children, from harm from the defendant outside the United Kingdom, and(b) in particular, whether an order imposing, varying or renewing a prohibition on foreign travel is necessary for that purpose.”(9) In section 122E (interim sexual risk orders)—(a) after subsection (2) insert—“(2A) If a list has been published under section 172 of the Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (list of countries where children are at high risk of sexual abuse or sexual exploitation) and has not been withdrawn, a person who has made, or is considering making, an application for a sexual risk order must have regard to the list in considering—(a) whether to apply for an interim sexual risk order for the purpose of protecting children generally, or any particular children, from harm from the defendant outside the United Kingdom, and(b) in particular, whether to apply for a prohibition on foreign travel to be included in any such order for that purpose.”,(b) after subsection (3) insert—(a) 
206	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 10 – Management of offendersCHAPTER 3 – Management of sex offenders Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes“(3A) If a list has been published under section 172 of the Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 and has not been withdrawn, the court must have regard to the list in considering—(a) whether to make an interim sexual risk order for the purpose of protecting children generally, or any particular children, from harm from the defendant outside the United Kingdom, and(b) in particular, whether to include a prohibition on foreign travel in any such order for that purpose.”, and(c) after subsection (5) insert—“(6) Subsections (2A) and (3A) apply in relation to an application for the variation or renewal of an interim sexual risk order as they apply in relation to an application for such an order.”174 Standard of proof(1) The Sexual Offences Act 2003 is amended as follows.(2) In section 103A(3) (sexual harm prevention orders: applications and grounds)—(a) omit “and” at the end of paragraph (a), and(b) for paragraph (b) substitute—“(b) the court is satisfied on the balance of probabilities that since the appropriate date the defendant has acted in one or more of the ways alleged by the person making the application, and(c) the court is satisfied that the defendant having acted in such a way makes it necessary to make a sexual harm prevention order, for the purpose of—(i) protecting the public or any particular members of the public from sexual harm from the defendant, or(ii) protecting children or vulnerable adults generally, or any particular children or vulnerable adults, from sexual harm from the defendant outside the United Kingdom.”(3) In section 122A (sexual risk orders: applications, grounds and effect), for subsection (6) substitute—“(6) On an application under subsection (1), the court may make a sexual risk order if—(a) the court is satisfied on the balance of probabilities that the defendant has, whether before or after the commencement of this Part, done one or more of the acts of a sexual nature alleged by the person making the application, and(b) the court is satisfied that as a result of the defendant acting in such a way it is necessary to make such an order for the purpose of—(a) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32) PART 10 – Management of offendersCHAPTER 3 – Management of sex offenders Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
207
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(i) protecting the public or any particular members of the public from harm from the defendant, or(ii) protecting children or vulnerable adults generally, or any particular children or vulnerable adults, from harm from the defendant outside the United Kingdom.”175 Sexual harm prevention orders: power to impose positive requirements(1) The Sentencing Code is amended in accordance with subsections (2) to (6).(2) In section 343 (sexual harm prevention order)—(a) for subsection (1) substitute—“(1) In this Code a “sexual harm prevention order” means an order made under this Chapter in respect of an offender.(1A) A sexual harm prevention order may—(a) prohibit the offender from doing anything described in the order;(b) require the offender to do anything described in the order.”,(b) in subsection (2), after “prohibitions” insert “or requirements”, and(c) after subsection (2) insert—“(3) The prohibitions or requirements which are imposed on the offender by a sexual harm prevention order must, so far as practicable, be such as to avoid—(a) any conflict with the offender’s religious beliefs,(b) any interference with the times, if any, at which the offender normally works or attends any educational establishment, and(c) any conflict with any other court order or injunction to which the offender may be subject (but see section 349).”(3) In section 347 (sexual harm prevention order: matters to be specified)—(a) in subsection (1)(a), after “prohibitions” insert “and requirements”,(b) in subsection (1)(b)—(i) after “each prohibition” insert “or requirement”, and(ii) for ““prohibition period”” substitute ““specified period””,(c) in subsection (2)—(i) in the words before paragraph (a), for “prohibition period” substitute “specified period”, and(ii) in paragraph (b), after “prohibition” insert “or requirement”, and(d) in subsection (3), after “prohibitions”, in both places it occurs, insert “or requirements”.(4) After section 347 insert—(2) 
208	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 10 – Management of offendersCHAPTER 3 – Management of sex offenders Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes“347A Sexual harm prevention orders: requirements included in order etc.(1) A sexual harm prevention order that imposes a requirement to do something on an offender must specify a person who is to be responsible for supervising compliance with the requirement.The person may be an individual or an organisation.(2) Before including such a requirement in a sexual harm prevention order, the court must receive evidence about its suitability and enforceability from—(a) the individual to be specified under subsection (1), if an individual is to be specified;(b) an individual representing the organisation to be specified under subsection (1), if an organisation is to be specified.(3) Subsections (1) and (2) do not apply in relation to electronic monitoring requirements (see instead section 348A(5) and (6)).(4) It is the duty of a person specified under subsection (1)—(a) to make any necessary arrangements in connection with the requirements for which the person has responsibility (“the relevant requirements”);(b) to promote the offender’s compliance with the relevant requirements;(c) if the person considers that—(i) the offender has complied with all the relevant requirements, or    (ii) the offender has failed to comply with a relevant requirement, to inform the appropriate chief officer of police.(5) In subsection (4)(c) the “appropriate chief officer of police means—(a) the chief officer of police for the police area in which it appears to the person specified under subsection (1) that the offender lives, or(b) if it appears to that person that the offender lives in more than one police area, whichever of the chief officers of police of those areas the person thinks it is most appropriate to inform.(6) An offender subject to a requirement imposed by a sexual harm prevention order must—(a) keep in touch with the person specified under subsection (1) in relation to that requirement, in accordance with any instructions given by that person from time to time, and  (b) notify that person of any change of the offender’s home address. These obligations have effect as requirements of the order.(7) In this section “home address”, in relation to an offender, means—(a) the address of the offender’s sole or main residence in the United Kingdom, or(b) where the offender has no such residence, the address or location of a place in the United Kingdom where the offender can regularly be(a) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32) PART 10 – Management of offendersCHAPTER 3 – Management of sex offenders Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
209
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesfound and, if there is more than one such place, such one of those places as the offender may select.”(5) In section 350 (sexual harm prevention orders: variations, renewals and discharges)—(a) in subsection (6)—(i) in the words before paragraph (a), after “prohibitions” insert “or requirements”, and(ii) in the words after paragraph (b), after “prohibitions” insert “and requirements”,(b) after subsection (6) insert—“(6A) Any additional prohibitions or requirements that are imposed on the offender must, so far as practicable, be such as to avoid—(a) any conflict with the offender’s religious beliefs,(b) any interference with the times, if any, at which the offender normally works or attends any educational establishment, and(c) any conflict with any other court order or injunction to which the offender may be subject.”, and(c) in subsection (8), after “other prohibitions” insert “or requirements”.(6) In section 354 (offence: breach of sexual harm prevention order)—(a) for subsection (1) substitute—“(1) A person commits an offence if, without reasonable excuse, the person—(a) does anything that the person is prohibited from doing by a sexual harm prevention order, or(b) fails to do something that the person is required to do by a sexual harm prevention order.”,(b) in subsection (2), for “doing anything prohibited by such an order” substitute “breaching such an order”, and(c) omit subsection (3).(7) In paragraph 98 of Schedule 22 to the Sentencing Act 2020 (amendment of section 354 of the Sentencing Code), in the substituted subsection (2) for “doing anything prohibited by such an order” substitute “breaching such an order”.(8) The Sexual Offences Act 2003 is amended as follows.(9) In section 103C (sexual harm prevention orders: effect)—(a) for subsection (1) substitute—“(1) A sexual harm prevention order may—(a) prohibit the defendant from doing anything described in the order;(b) require the defendant to do anything described in the order.”,(b) in subsection (2), after “prohibition” insert “or requirement”,(c) in subsection (3), after “prohibitions”, in both places it occurs, insert “or requirements”,(d) in subsection (4), after “prohibitions” insert “or requirements”, and(e) after subsection (4) insert—(a) 
210	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 10 – Management of offendersCHAPTER 3 – Management of sex offenders Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes“(4A) The prohibitions or requirements which are imposed on the defendant by a sexual harm prevention order must, so far as practicable, be such as to avoid—(a) any conflict with the defendant’s religious beliefs,(b) any interference with the times, if any, at which the defendant normally works or attends any educational establishment, and(c) any conflict with any other court order or injunction to which the defendant may be subject (but see subsection (6)).”(10) After section 103C insert—“103CA SHPOs: requirements included in order etc.(1) A sexual harm prevention order that imposes a requirement to do something on a defendant must specify a person who is to be responsible for supervising compliance with the requirement.The person may be an individual or an organisation.(2) Before including such a requirement in a sexual harm prevention order, the court must receive evidence about its suitability and enforceability from—(a) the individual to be specified under subsection (1), if an individual is to be specified;(b) an individual representing the organisation to be specified under subsection (1), if an organisation is to be specified.(3) Subsections (1) and (2) do not apply in relation to electronic monitoring requirements (see instead section 103FA(5) and (6)).(4) It is the duty of a person specified under subsection (1)—(a) to make any necessary arrangements in connection with the requirements for which the person has responsibility (“the relevant requirements”);(b) to promote the defendant’s compliance with the relevant requirements;(c) if the person considers that—(i) the defendant has complied with all the relevant requirements, or(ii) the defendant has failed to comply with a relevant requirement,to inform the appropriate chief officer of police.(5) In subsection (4)(c) the “appropriate chief officer of police means—(a) the chief officer of police for the police area in which it appears to the person specified under subsection (1) that the defendant resides, or(b) if it appears to that person that the defendant resides in more than one police area, whichever of the chief officers of police of those areas the person thinks it is most appropriate to inform.(6) A defendant subject to a requirement imposed by a sexual harm prevention order must—(1) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32) PART 10 – Management of offendersCHAPTER 3 – Management of sex offenders Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
211
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(a) keep in touch with the person specified under subsection (1) in relation to that requirement, in accordance with any instructions given by that person from time to time, and  (b) notify that person of any change of the defendant’s home address. These obligations have effect as requirements of the order.”(11) In section 103E (sexual harm prevention orders: variations, renewals and discharges)—(a) in subsection (5)—(i) in the words before paragraph (a), after “prohibitions” insert “or requirements”, and(ii) in the words after paragraph (b), after “prohibitions” insert “and requirements”,(b) after subsection (5) insert—“(5A) Any additional prohibitions or requirements that are imposed on the defendant must, so far as practicable, be such as to avoid—(a) any conflict with the defendant’s religious beliefs,(b) any interference with the times, if any, at which the defendant normally works or attends any educational establishment, and(c) any conflict with any other court order or injunction to which the defendant may be subject.”, and(c) in subsection (8), after “prohibitions” insert “or requirements”.(12) In section 103F(3) (interim sexual harm prevention orders), for the words from “, prohibiting the defendant” to the end of the subsection substitute “—(a) prohibiting the defendant from doing anything described in the order;(b) requiring the defendant to do anything described in the order.”(13) In section 103I (offence: breach of sexual harm prevention order or interim sexual harm prevention order)—(a) before subsection (1) insert—“(A1) A person who, without reasonable excuse—(a) does anything that the person is prohibited from doing by a sexual harm prevention order or an interim sexual harm prevention order, or(b) fails to do something that the person is required to do by a sexual harm prevention order or an interim sexual harm prevention order,commits an offence.”,(b) in subsection (1), omit paragraphs (a) and (b), and(c) omit subsection (2).
212	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 10 – Management of offendersCHAPTER 3 – Management of sex offenders Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes176 Sexual risk orders: power to impose positive requirements(1) The Sexual Offences Act 2003 is amended as follows.(2) In section 122A (sexual risk orders: applications, grounds and effect)—(a) for subsection (7) substitute—“(7) A sexual risk order may—(a) prohibit the defendant from doing anything described in the order;(b) require the defendant to do anything described in the order.”,(b) in subsection (8), for the words from “may specify” to the end of the subsection substitute “—(a) has effect for a fixed period (not less than 2 years) specified in the order or until further order, and(b) may specify different periods for different prohibitions or requirements.”,(c) in subsection (9), after “prohibitions” insert “or requirements”, and(d) after subsection (9) insert—“(9A) The prohibitions or requirements which are imposed on the defendant by a sexual risk order must, so far as practicable, be such as to avoid—(a) any conflict with the defendant’s religious beliefs,(b) any interference with the times, if any, at which the defendant normally works or attends any educational establishment, and(c) any conflict with any other court order or injunction to which the defendant may be subject (but see subsection (10)).”(3) After section 122B insert—“122BA Sexual risk orders: requirements included in order etc.(1) A sexual risk order that imposes a requirement to do something on a defendant must specify a person who is to be responsible for supervising compliance with the requirement.The person may be an individual or an organisation.(2) Before including such a requirement in a sexual risk order, the court must receive evidence about its suitability and enforceability from—(a) the individual to be specified under subsection (1), if an individual is to be specified;(b) an individual representing the organisation to be specified under subsection (1), if an organisation is to be specified.(3) Subsections (1) and (2) do not apply in relation to electronic monitoring requirements (see instead section 122EA(5) and (6)).(4) It is the duty of a person specified under subsection (1)—(a) to make any necessary arrangements in connection with the requirements for which the person has responsibility (“the relevant requirements”);(a) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32) PART 10 – Management of offendersCHAPTER 3 – Management of sex offenders Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
213
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(b) to	promote	the	defendant’s	compliance	with	the	relevant requirements;(c) if the person considers that—(i) the	defendant	has	complied	with	all	the	relevant requirements, or(ii) the defendant has failed to comply with a relevant requirement,to inform the appropriate chief officer of police.(5) In subsection (4)(c) the “appropriate chief officer of police means—(a) the chief officer of police for the police area in which it appears to the person specified under subsection (1) that the defendant resides, or(b) if it appears to that person that the defendant resides in more than one police area, whichever of the chief officers of police of those areas the person thinks it is most appropriate to inform.(6) A defendant subject to a requirement imposed by a sexual risk order must—(a) keep in touch with the person specified under subsection (1) in relation to that requirement, in accordance with any instructions given by that person from time to time, and  (b) notify that person of any change of the defendant’s home address. These obligations have effect as requirements of the order.”(4) In section 122D (sexual risk orders: variations, renewals and discharges)—(a) in subsection (4)—(i) in the words before paragraph (a), after “prohibitions” insert “or requirements”, and(ii) in the words after paragraph (b), after “prohibitions” insert “and requirements”, and(b) after that subsection, insert—“(4A) Any additional prohibitions or requirements that are imposed on the defendant must, so far as practicable, be such as to avoid—(a) any conflict with the defendant’s religious beliefs,(b) any interference with the times, if any, at which the defendant normally works or attends any educational establishment, and(c) any conflict with any other court order or injunction to which the defendant may be subject.”(5) In section 122E(3) (interim sexual risk orders), for the words from “, prohibiting the defendant” to the end of the subsection substitute “—(a) prohibiting the defendant from doing anything described in the order;(b) requiring the defendant to do anything described in the order.”(6) In section 122H (offence: breach of sexual risk order or interim sexual risk order etc)—(a) before subsection (1) insert—“(A1) A person who, without reasonable excuse—(a) does anything that the person is prohibited from doing by a sexual risk order or an interim sexual risk order, or(a) 
214	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 10 – Management of offendersCHAPTER 3 – Management of sex offenders Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(b) fails to do something that the person is required to do by a sexual risk order or an interim sexual risk order,commits an offence.”,(b) in subsection (1), omit paragraphs (a) and (b), and(c) omit subsection (2).177 Positive requirements: further amendments(1) In section 351 of the Sentencing Code (variation of sexual harm prevention order by court in Northern Ireland)—(a) in subsection (6), in the words before paragraph (a), after “prohibitions” insert “or requirements”, and(b) in subsection (7), in the words before paragraph (a), after “prohibitions” insert “and requirements”.(2) In section 113 of the Sexual Offences Act 2003 (offence: breach of SOPO or interim SOPO etc), for subsection (1ZA) substitute—“(1ZA) A person commits an offence if, without reasonable excuse, the person—(a) contravenes a prohibition imposed by—(i) a sexual harm prevention order,(ii) an order under Chapter 2 of Part 11 of the Sentencing Code (sexual harm prevention order on conviction), or   (iii) an interim sexual harm prevention order, other than a prohibition on foreign travel, or(b) fails to comply with a requirement imposed by—(i) a sexual harm prevention order,(ii) an order under Chapter 2 of Part 11 of the Sentencing Code (sexual harm prevention order on conviction), or(iii) an interim sexual harm prevention order.”(3) In section 128 of the Sexual Offences Act 2003 (offence: breach of RSHO or interim RSHO etc)—(a) in subsection (1) omit paragraphs (c) and (d), and(b) after subsection (1) insert—“(1A) A person who, without reasonable excuse—(a) does anything that the person is prohibited from doing by a sexual risk order or an interim sexual risk order, or(b) fails to do something that the person is required to do by a sexual risk order or an interim sexual risk order,commits an offence.”(4) In section 136ZA(2) of the Sexual Offences Act 2003 (application of orders throughout the United Kingdom), after “prohibitions” insert “or requirements”.(1) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32) PART 10 – Management of offendersCHAPTER 3 – Management of sex offenders Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
215
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(5) In section 136ZC of the Sexual Offences Act 2003 (variation of sexual harm prevention order by court in Northern Ireland)—(a) in subsection (5), in the words before paragraph (a), after “prohibitions” insert “or requirements”, and(b) in subsection (6), in the words before paragraph (a), after “prohibitions” insert “and requirements”.(6) In section 136ZD of the Sexual Offences Act 2003 (variation of sexual risk order by court in Northern Ireland)—(a) in subsection (4), in the words before paragraph (a), after “prohibitions” insert “or requirements”, and(b) in subsection (5), in the words before paragraph (a), after “prohibitions” insert “and requirements”.(7) In section 37 of the Abusive Behaviour and Sexual Harm (Scotland) Act 2016 (asp 22) (breach of orders equivalent to orders in Chapters 3 and 4: offence)—(a) after subsection (1) insert—“(1A) A person commits an offence if, without reasonable excuse, the person fails to do something which the person is required to do by an equivalent order from elsewhere in the United Kingdom.”,(b) in each of subsections (2) and (3), after “subsection (1)” insert “or (1A)”, and(c) in subsection (4), after “prohibitions” insert “or requirements”.
216	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 10 – Management of offendersCHAPTER 3 – Management of sex offenders Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(4) After section 348 insert—“348A Sexual harm prevention orders: electronic monitoring requirements(1) Subsections (2) and (3) apply for the purpose of determining whether a court may impose, under section 343(4), an electronic monitoring requirement on the offender in a sexual harm prevention order.(2) If there is a person (other than the offender) without whose co-operation it would be impracticable to secure the monitoring in question, the requirement may not be imposed without that person’s consent.(3) The court may impose the requirement only if—(a) it has been notified by the Secretary of State that electronic monitoring arrangements are available in the relevant area, and(b) it is satisfied that the necessary provision can be made under the arrangements currently available.(4) In subsection (3)(a) “the relevant area” means—(a) the local justice area in which it appears to the court that the offender resides or will reside, and(b) in a case where it is proposed to include in the order—(i) a requirement that the offender must remain, for specified periods, at a specified place, or(ii) a provision prohibiting the offender from entering a specified place or area,the local justice area in which the place or area proposed to be specified is situated.“Specified” means specified in the sexual harm prevention order under which the electronic monitoring requirement is imposed.(5) A sexual harm prevention order that includes an electronic monitoring requirement must specify the person who is to be responsible for the monitoring.(6) The person specified under subsection (5) (“the responsible person”) must be of a description specified in regulations made by the Secretary of State.(7) Where a sexual harm prevention order imposes an electronic monitoring requirement on the offender, the offender must (among other things)—(a) submit, as required from time to time by the responsible person, to—(i) being fitted with, or the installation of, any necessary apparatus, and(ii) the inspection or repair of any apparatus fitted or installed for the purposes of the monitoring,(b) not interfere with, or with the working of, any apparatus fitted or installed for the purposes of the monitoring, and(c) take any steps required by the responsible person for the purpose of keeping in working order any apparatus fitted or installed for the purpose of the monitoring.(a) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32) PART 10 – Management of offendersCHAPTER 3 – Management of sex offenders Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
217
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesThese obligations have effect as requirements of the sexual harm prevention order under which the electronic monitoring requirement is imposed.(8) A sexual harm prevention order may not provide for an electronic monitoring requirement to have effect for more than 12 months.(9) Subsection (8) does not prevent an electronic monitoring requirement from being extended for a further period (of no more than 12 months each time) under section 350.348B Data from electronic monitoring: code of practice(1) The Secretary of State must issue a code of practice relating to the processing of data gathered in the course of electronic monitoring of offenders under electronic monitoring requirements imposed by sexual harm prevention orders.(2) A failure to observe a code issued under this section does not of itself make a person liable to any criminal or civil proceedings.”(5) In section 350 (sexual harm prevention orders: variations, renewals, discharges), after subsection (6B) (inserted by section 173 of this Act) insert—“(6C) Section 348A (electronic monitoring requirements) applies in relation to—(a) the variation of an order to require the defendant to submit to electronic monitoring of the defendant’s compliance with the prohibitions and requirements imposed by the order, or(b) the renewal of an order to continue such a requirement,as it applies in relation to the making of a sexual harm prevention order, subject to subsection (6D).(6D) In its application to the variation or renewal of an order, section 348A(4)(b) has effect as if—(a) the reference to a case where it is proposed to include in the order a requirement or provision mentioned in sub-paragraph (i) or (ii) included a case where the order already includes such a requirement or provision, and(b) the reference to the local justice area in which the place or area proposed to be specified is situated included the local justice area in which the place or area already specified is situated.”(6) The Sexual Offences Act 2003 is amended in accordance with subsections (7) to (16).(7) In section 103C (sexual harm prevention orders: effect)—(a) in subsection (2), for “section 103D(1)” substitute “sections 103D(1) and 103FA(8)”, and(b) after subsection (4A) (inserted by section 175 of this Act) insert—“(4B) A sexual harm prevention order may require the defendant to submit to electronic monitoring of the defendant’s compliance with the prohibitions and requirements imposed by the order (see section 103FA for further provision about such a requirement).”
218	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 10 – Management of offendersCHAPTER 3 – Management of sex offenders Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(8) In section 103E (sexual harm prevention orders: variations, renewals and discharges) after subsection (5B) (inserted by section 173 of this Act) insert—“(5C) Section 103FA (electronic monitoring requirements) applies in relation to—(a) the variation of an order to require the defendant to submit to electronic monitoring of the defendant’s compliance with the prohibitions and requirements imposed by the order, or(b) the renewal of an order to continue such a requirement,as it applies in relation to the making of a sexual harm prevention order, subject to subsection (5D).(5D) In its application to the variation or renewal of an order, section 103FA(4)(b) has effect as if—(a) the reference to a case where it is proposed to include in the order a requirement or provision mentioned in sub-paragraph (i) or (ii) included a case where the order already includes such a requirement or provision, and(b) the reference to the local justice area in which the place or area proposed to be specified is situated included the local justice area in which the place or area already specified is situated.”(9) In section 103F (interim sexual harm prevention orders)—(a) after subsection (3A) (inserted by section 173 of this Act) insert—“(3B) An interim sexual harm prevention order may require the defendant to submit to electronic monitoring of the defendant’s compliance with the prohibitions and requirements imposed by the order (see section 103FA for further provision about such a requirement).”, and(b) in subsection (4) for “Such an order” substitute “An interim sexual harm prevention order”.(10) After section 103F insert—“103FA SHPOs and interim SHPOs: electronic monitoring requirements(1) Subsections (2) and (3) apply for the purpose of determining whether a court may impose, under section 103C(4B) or section 103F(3B), an electronic monitoring requirement on the defendant in a sexual harm prevention order or interim sexual harm prevention order.(2) If there is a person (other than the defendant) without whose co-operation it would be impracticable to secure the monitoring in question, the requirement may not be imposed without that person’s consent.(3) The court may impose the requirement only if—(a) it has been notified by the Secretary of State that electronic monitoring arrangements are available in the relevant area, and(b) it is satisfied that the necessary provision can be made under the arrangements currently available.(4) In subsection (3)(a) “the relevant area” means—(a) the local justice area in which it appears to the court that the defendant resides or will reside, and(a) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32) PART 10 – Management of offendersCHAPTER 3 – Management of sex offenders Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
219
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(b) in a case where it is proposed to include in the order—(i) a requirement that the defendant must remain, for specified periods, at a specified place, or(ii) a provision prohibiting the defendant from entering a specified place or area,the local justice area in which the place or area proposed to be specified is situated.“Specified” means specified in the sexual harm prevention order or interim sexual harm prevention order under which the electronic monitoring requirement is imposed.(5) A sexual harm prevention order or interim sexual harm prevention order that includes an electronic monitoring requirement must specify the person who is to be responsible for the monitoring.(6) The person specified under subsection (5) (“the responsible person”) must be of a description specified in regulations made by the Secretary of State.(7) Where a sexual harm prevention order or interim sexual harm prevention order imposes an electronic monitoring requirement on the defendant, the defendant must (among other things)—(a) submit, as required from time to time by the responsible person, to—(i) being fitted with, or the installation of, any necessary apparatus, and(ii) the inspection or repair of any apparatus fitted or installed for the purposes of the monitoring,(b) not interfere with, or with the working of, any apparatus fitted or installed for the purposes of the monitoring, and(c) take any steps required by the responsible person for the purpose of keeping in working order any apparatus fitted or installed for the purpose of the monitoring.These obligations have effect as requirements of the sexual harm prevention order or interim sexual harm prevention order under which the electronic monitoring requirement is imposed.(8) A sexual harm prevention order or an interim sexual harm prevention order may not provide for an electronic monitoring requirement to have effect for more than 12 months.(9) Subsection (8) does not prevent an electronic monitoring requirement from being extended for a further period (of no more than 12 months each time) under section 103E.103FB Data from electronic monitoring: code of practice(1) The Secretary of State must issue a code of practice relating to the processing of data gathered in the course of electronic monitoring of defendants under electronic monitoring requirements imposed by—(a) sexual harm prevention orders,(b) relevant Scottish orders within the meaning of section 136ZG that have been renewed or varied as mentioned in subsection (11) of(a) 
220	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 10 – Management of offendersCHAPTER 3 – Management of sex offenders Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesthat section (variation etc by court in England and Wales to impose electronic monitoring requirement), and(c) sexual offences prevention orders that have been renewed or varied as mentioned in section 136ZH(10) (variation etc by court in England and Wales to impose electronic monitoring requirement).(2) A failure to observe a code issued under this section does not of itself make a person liable to any criminal or civil proceedings.”(11) In section 122A (sexual risk orders: applications, grounds and effect)—(a) after subsection (8) insert—“(8A) Subsection (8) is subject to section 122C(1) (duration of prohibitions on foreign travel) and section 122EA(8) (duration of electronic monitoring requirements).”, and(b) after subsection (9A) (as inserted by section 176 of this Act) insert—“(9B) A sexual risk order may require the defendant to submit to electronic monitoring of the defendant’s compliance with the prohibitions and requirements imposed by the order (see section 122EA for further provision about such a requirement).”(12) In section 122D (sexual risk orders: variations, renewals and discharges) after subsection (4B) (inserted by section 173 of this Act) insert—“(4C) Section 122EA (electronic monitoring requirements) applies in relation to—(a) the variation of an order to require the defendant to submit to electronic monitoring of the defendant’s compliance with the prohibitions and requirements imposed by the order, or(b) the renewal of an order to continue such a requirement,as it applies in relation to the making of a sexual risk order, subject to subsection (4D).(4D) In its application to the variation or renewal of an order, section 122EA(4)(b) has effect as if—(a) the reference to a case where it is proposed to include in the order a requirement or provision mentioned in sub-paragraph (i) or (ii) included a case where the order already includes such a requirement or provision, and(b) the reference to the local justice area in which the place or area proposed to be specified is situated included the local justice area in which the place or area already specified is situated.”(13) In section 122E (interim sexual risk orders)—(a) after subsection (3A) (inserted by section 173 of this Act) insert—“(3B) An interim sexual risk order may require the defendant to submit to electronic monitoring of the defendant’s compliance with the prohibitions and requirements imposed by the order (see section 122EA for further provision about such a requirement).”, and(b) in subsection (4) for “Such an order” substitute “An interim sexual risk order”.(14) After section 122E insert—(4) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32) PART 10 – Management of offendersCHAPTER 3 – Management of sex offenders Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
221
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes“122EA Sexual risk orders and interim sexual risk orders: electronic monitoring requirements(1) Subsections (2) and (3) apply for the purpose of determining whether a court may impose, under section 122A(9B) or section 122E(3B), an electronic monitoring requirement on the defendant in a sexual risk order or interim sexual risk order.(2) If there is a person (other than the defendant) without whose co-operation it would be impracticable to secure the monitoring in question, the requirement may not be imposed without that person’s consent.(3) The court may impose the requirement only if—(a) it has been notified by the Secretary of State that electronic monitoring arrangements are available in the relevant area, and(b) it is satisfied that the necessary provision can be made under the arrangements currently available.(4) In subsection (3)(a) “the relevant area” means—(a) the local justice area in which it appears to the court that the defendant resides or will reside, and(b) in a case where it is proposed to include in the order—(i) a requirement that the defendant must remain, for specified periods, at a specified place, or(ii) a provision prohibiting the defendant from entering a specified place or area,the local justice area in which the place or area proposed to be specified is situated.“Specified” means specified in the sexual risk order or interim sexual risk order under which the electronic monitoring requirement is imposed.(5) A sexual risk order or interim sexual risk order that includes an electronic monitoring requirement must specify the person who is to be responsible for the monitoring.(6) The person specified under subsection (5) (“the responsible person”) must be of a description specified in regulations made by the Secretary of State.(7) Where a sexual risk order or interim sexual risk order imposes an electronic monitoring requirement on the defendant, the defendant must (among other things)—(a) submit, as required from time to time by the responsible person, to—(i) being fitted with, or the installation of, any necessary apparatus, and(ii) the inspection or repair of any apparatus fitted or installed for the purposes of the monitoring,(b) not interfere with, or with the working of, any apparatus fitted or installed for the purposes of the monitoring, and(c) take any steps required by the responsible person for the purpose of keeping in working order any apparatus fitted or installed for the purpose of the monitoring.(a) 
222	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 10 – Management of offendersCHAPTER 3 – Management of sex offenders Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesThese obligations have effect as requirements of the sexual risk order or interim sexual risk order under which the electronic monitoring requirement is imposed.(8) A sexual risk order or an interim sexual risk order may not provide for an electronic monitoring requirement to have effect for more than 12 months.(9) Subsection (8) does not prevent an electronic monitoring requirement from being extended for a further period (of no more than 12 months each time) under section 122D.122EB Data from electronic monitoring: code of practice(1) The Secretary of State must issue a code of practice relating to the processing of data gathered in the course of electronic monitoring of defendants under electronic monitoring requirements imposed by—(a) sexual risk orders,(b) relevant Scottish orders within the meaning of section 136ZI that have been renewed or varied as mentioned in subsection (11) of that section (variation etc by court in England and Wales to impose electronic monitoring requirement), and(c) risk of sexual harm orders that have been renewed or varied as mentioned in section 136ZJ(7) (variation etc by court in England and Wales to impose electronic monitoring requirement).(2) A failure to observe a code issued under this section does not of itself make a person liable to any criminal or civil proceedings.”(15) In section 136ZA, after subsection (2) insert—“(3) A requirement that is imposed by a relevant order and that relates to the electronic monitoring of a person’s compliance with the prohibitions or requirements imposed by the order is to be treated for the purposes of subsection (2) as a requirement that is expressly confined to a particular locality.”(16) In section 138(3), after “containing” insert “only regulations under section 103FA(6) or section 122EA(6) or”.179 Positive requirements and electronic monitoring requirements: service courtsIn section 137(3) of the Sexual Offences Act 2003 (service courts: sexual harm prevention orders)—(a) in paragraph (a)—(i) after “103A(3)” insert “and (4)”, and(i) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32) PART 10 – Management of offendersCHAPTER 3 – Management of sex offenders Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
223
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(ii) for the words from “and 103J” to “Sentencing Code” substitute “, 103FA(3)(a), (4) and (6) and 103J of this Act, and sections 348A(3) (a), (4) and (6) and 355 to 357 of the Sentencing Code”,(b) in paragraph (b), in the words before sub-paragraph (i)—(i) for “103A(1) and (2)” substitute “103A(1), (2) and (3A), and(ii) for the words from “and 103G” to “Sentencing Code” substitute “, 103FA(1), (2), (3)(b) and (5) to (9), 103FB and 103G to 103I of this Act, and sections 343 to 348, 348A(1), (2), (3)(b) and (5) to (9), 348B to 354 and 358 of the Sentencing Code”,(c) in paragraph (b)(i), after “paragraphs” insert “(ba), (bb)”,(d) after paragraph (b) insert—“(ba) if section 103CA applies to the defendant at a time when the defendant is a person subject to service law or a civilian subject to service discipline, the reference in section 103CA(4)(c) (requirements included in order: report on compliance) to the appropriate chief officer of police is to be read as a reference to a Provost Marshal;(bb) if section 347A applies to the defendant at a time when the defendant is a person subject to service law or a civilian subject to service discipline, the reference in section 347A(4)(c) of the Sentencing Code (requirements included in order: report on compliance) to the appropriate chief office of police is to be read as a reference to a Provost Marshal;”,(e) in paragraph (c), for “Provost Martial”, in both places it occurs, substitute “Provost Marshal”, and(f) in paragraph (c), after sub-paragraph (i) insert—“(ia) the reference in section 103E(2A) to a person mentioned in subsection (2)(b) to (d) is to be read as a reference to a Provost Marshal;(ib) the reference in section 350(3A) of the Sentencing Code to a person mentioned in subsection (2)(b) or(c) is to be read as a reference to a Provost Marshal;”.Orders made in different parts of the United Kingdom180 Enforcement of requirements of orders made in Scotland or Northern Ireland(1) The Sexual Offences Act 2003 is amended as follows.(2) In section 103I (offence: breach of SHPO or interim SHPO etc), after subsection (1) insert—“(1A) A person who, without reasonable excuse, fails to do something that the person is required to do by a sexual offences prevention order or an interim sexual offences prevention order commits an offence.
224	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 10 – Management of offendersCHAPTER 3 – Management of sex offenders Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(1B) A person who, without reasonable excuse—(a) does anything that the person is prohibited from doing by a relevant Scottish order, or(b) fails to do something that the person is required to do by a relevant Scottish order,commits an offence.(1C) In subsection (1B) “relevant Scottish order” means—(a) a sexual harm prevention order made under section 11 or 12 of the Abusive Behaviour and Sexual Harm (Scotland) Act 2016 (asp 22), or(b) an interim sexual harm prevention order made under section 21 of that Act.”(3) In section 113 (offence: breach of SOPO or interim SOPO etc), after subsection (1ZA) insert—“(1ZB) A person commits an offence if, without reasonable excuse, the person—(a) contravenes a prohibition imposed by a relevant Scottish order other than a prohibition on foreign travel, or(b) fails to comply with a requirement imposed by a relevant Scottish order.(1ZC) In subsection (1ZB)—  “prohibition on foreign travel” has the meaning given by section 17(2) of the Abusive Behaviour and Sexual Harm (Scotland) Act 2016 (asp 22);“relevant Scottish order” means—(a) a sexual harm prevention order made under section 11 or 12 of the Abusive Behaviour and Sexual Harm (Scotland) Act 2016, or(b) an interim sexual harm prevention order made under section 21 of that Act.”(4) In section 122(1) (offence: breach of foreign travel order)—(a) omit the “or” at the end of paragraph (a), and(b) at the end of paragraph (b) insert “, or(c) he contravenes a prohibition on foreign travel imposed by a sexual harm prevention order made under section 11 or 12 of the Abusive Behaviour and Sexual Harm (Scotland) Act 2016 (asp 22).”(5) In section 122H (offence: breach of sexual risk order or interim sexual risk order etc)—(a) in subsection (1) omit paragraphs (e) and (f), and(b) after subsection (1) insert—“(1A) A person who, without reasonable excuse, does anything that the person is required to do by a risk of sexual harm order that has been renewed or varied as mentioned in section 136ZJ(7) commits an offence.(1B) A person who, without reasonable excuse—
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32) PART 10 – Management of offendersCHAPTER 3 – Management of sex offenders Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
225
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(a) does anything that the person is prohibited from doing by a relevant Scottish order, or(b) fails to do something that the person is required to do by a relevant Scottish order,commits an offence.(1C) In subsection (1B) “relevant Scottish order” means—(a) a sexual risk order made under section 27 of the Abusive Behaviour and Sexual Harm (Scotland) Act 2016 (asp 22), or(b) an interim sexual risk order made under section 31 of that Act.”(6) In section 128 (offence: breach of risk of sexual harm order or interim risk of sexual harm order etc)—(a) in subsection (1) omit paragraphs (e) and (f), and(b) after subsection (1A) (inserted by section 177) insert—“(1B) A person who, without reasonable excuse—(a) does anything that the person is prohibited from doing by a relevant Scottish order, or(b) fails to do something that the person is required to do by a relevant Scottish order,commits an offence.(1C) In subsection (1B) “relevant Scottish order” means—(a) a sexual risk order made under section 27 of the Abusive Behaviour and Sexual Harm (Scotland) Act 2016 (asp 22), or(b) an interim sexual risk order made under section 31 of that Act.”(7) In section 136ZA (application of orders throughout the United Kingdom) in subsection (1)—(a) after paragraph (i) insert—“(ia) a sexual harm prevention order made under section 11 or 12 of the Abusive Behaviour and Sexual Harm (Scotland) Act 2016 (asp 22);(ib) an interim sexual harm prevention order made under section 21 of that Act;(ic)  a sexual risk order made under section 27 of that Act;(id) an interim sexual risk order made under section 31 of that Act.”, and(b) omit paragraphs (j) and (k).
226	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 10 – Management of offendersCHAPTER 3 – Management of sex offenders Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes181 Effect of conviction for breach of Scottish order etc(1) In section 122I of the Sexual Offences Act 2003 (effect of conviction etc of an offence under section 122H etc)—(a) in subsection (2), omit paragraph (b),(b) after subsection (2) insert—“(2A) This section also applies to a person (“the defendant”) who—(a) is convicted of an offence mentioned in subsection (2B),(b) is acquitted of such an offence by reason of the special defence set out in section 51A of the Criminal Procedure (Scotland) Act 1995, or(c) is found, in respect of such an offence, to be unfit for trial under section 53F of that Act in a case where the court determines that the defendant has done the act constituting the offence.(2B) Those offences are—(a) an offence under section 34 of the Abusive Behaviour and Sexual Harm (Scotland) Act 2016 (asp 22) (breach of sexual risk order or interim sexual risk order in Scotland);(b) an offence under section 37 of that Act (breach of equivalent orders) in respect of a breach of an order made under section 122A, 122E, 123 or 126 of this Act.”,(c) in subsection (6)—(i) in paragraph (a), for “or caution” substitute “, caution or acquittal”,(ii) in that paragraph, after “subsection (1)” insert “or (2A)”,(iii) in paragraph (b), for “or caution” substitute “, caution or acquittal”, and(iv) in that paragraph, after “subsection (1)” insert “or (2A)”,(d) after subsection (6) insert—“(6A) In subsection (6) “sexual risk order” and “interim sexual risk order” include orders under sections 27 and 31 (respectively) of the Abusive Behaviour and Sexual Harm (Scotland) Act 2016.”, and(e) omit subsection (7).(2) In section 129 of the Sexual Offences Act 2003 (effect of conviction etc of an offence under section 128 etc)—(a) in subsection (1A), omit paragraph (b),(b) after subsection (1A) insert—“(1B) This section also applies to a person (“the defendant”) who—(a) is convicted of an offence mentioned in subsection (1C),(b) is acquitted of such an offence by reason of the special defence set out in section 51A of the Criminal Procedure (Scotland) Act 1995, or(c) is found, in respect of such an offence, to be unfit for trial under section 53F of that Act in a case where the court determines that the defendant has done the act constituting the offence.(a) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32) PART 10 – Management of offendersCHAPTER 3 – Management of sex offenders Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
227
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(1C) Those offences are—(a) an offence under section 34 of the Abusive Behaviour and Sexual Harm (Scotland) Act 2016 (asp 22) (breach of sexual risk order or interim sexual risk order in Scotland);(b) an offence under section 37 of that Act (breach of equivalent orders) in respect of a breach of an order made under section 122A, 122E, 123 or 126 of this Act.”,(c) in subsection (5)—(i) in paragraph (a), for “or caution” substitute “, caution or acquittal”,(ii) in that paragraph, after “subsection (1)” insert “or (1B)”,(iii) in paragraph (b), for “or caution” substitute “, caution or acquittal”, and(iv) in that paragraph, after “subsection (1)” insert “or (1B)”,(d) after subsection (5) insert—“(5A) In subsection (5) “sexual risk order” and “interim sexual risk order” include orders under sections 27 and 31 (respectively) of the Abusive Behaviour and Sexual Harm (Scotland) Act 2016.”, and(e) omit subsection (6).182 Orders superseding, or superseded by, Scottish orders(1) In section 349(2) of the Sentencing Code (making of sexual harm prevention order: effect on other orders)—(a) omit the “or” at the end of paragraph (a), and(b) at the end of paragraph (b) insert “, or(c) a sexual harm prevention order made under section 11 or 12 of the Abusive Behaviour and Sexual Harm (Scotland) Act 2016 (asp 22),”.(2) Section 136ZB of the Sexual Offences Act 2003 (order ceases to have effect when new order made) is amended as follows.(3) In subsection (1), in the table—(a) in the entry relating to a sexual harm prevention order, in the second column, after “—foreign travel order” insert—ó “sexual harm prevention order made under section 11 or 12 of the Abusive Behaviour and Sexual Harm (Scotland) Act 2016 (asp 22).”, and(b) in the entry relating to a sexual risk order, in the second column, after “— foreign travel order” insert—ó “sexual risk order made under section 27 of the Abusive Behaviour and Sexual Harm (Scotland) Act 2016.”
228	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 10 – Management of offendersCHAPTER 3 – Management of sex offenders Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(4) In subsection (2)—(a) in the words before the table—(i) omit “or Scotland”, and(ii) after “England and Wales” insert “or Scotland”, and(b) in the table—(i) in the entry relating to a sexual offences prevention order, in the second column, after “—in the case of a sexual harm prevention order containing a prohibition on foreign travel, each of its other prohibitions” insert—ó “sexual harm prevention order made under section 11 or 12 of the Abusive Behaviour and Sexual Harm (Scotland) Act 2016 not containing a prohibition on foreign travel;ó in the case of a sexual harm prevention order made under section 11 or 12 of that Act containing a prohibition on foreign travel, each of its other prohibitions.”,(ii) in the entry relating to a foreign travel order, in the second column, after “—prohibition on foreign travel contained in a sexual harm prevention order” insert—ó “prohibition on foreign travel contained in a sexual harm prevention order made under section 11 or 12 of the Abusive Behaviour and Sexual Harm (Scotland) Act 2016.”, and(iii) in the entry relating to a risk of sexual harm order, in the second column, after “—in the case of a sexual risk order containing a prohibition on foreign travel, each of its other prohibitions” insert—ó “sexual risk order made under section 27 of the Abusive Behaviour and Sexual Harm (Scotland) Act 2016 not containing a prohibition on foreign travel;ó in the case of a sexual risk order made under section 27 of that Act containing a prohibition on foreign travel, each of its other prohibitions.”(5) After subsection (2) insert—“(2ZA) Where a court in Scotland makes an order listed in the first column of the following Table in relation to a person who is already subject to an order or prohibition listed opposite it in the second column, the earlier order or prohibition ceases to have effect (even though it was made or imposed by a court in England and Wales or Northern Ireland) unless the court orders otherwise.New orderEarlier order or prohibitionSexual harm prevention order made under section 11 or 12 of the Abusive Behaviour and Sexual Harm (Scotland) Act 2016ó sexual harm prevention order;ó sexual offences prevention order;ó foreign travel order.
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32) PART 10 – Management of offendersCHAPTER 4 – Management of terrorist offenders Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
229
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesNew orderEarlier order or prohibitionSexual risk order made under section 27 of the Abusive Behaviour and Sexual Harm (Scotland) Act 2016ó sexual risk order;ó risk of sexual harm order;ó foreign travel order.”(6) In subsection (2A), after “subsection (2)” insert “or subsection (2ZA)”.(7) In subsection (3), omit paragraph (b).183 Variation etc of order by court in another part of the United Kingdom(1) Schedule 18 contains amendments enabling a court in one part of the United Kingdom to vary, renew or discharge an order made in another.(2) In that Schedule—(a) Part 1 enables a court in Northern Ireland to renew or discharge orders made in England and Wales and to vary, renew or discharge orders made in Scotland;(b) Part 2 enables a court in Scotland to vary, renew or discharge orders made in England and Wales or Northern Ireland;(c) Part 3 enables a court in England and Wales to vary, renew or discharge orders made in Scotland or Northern Ireland.CHAPTER 4MANAGEMENT OF TERRORIST OFFENDERS184 Terrorist offenders released on licence: arrest without warrant pending recall decision(1) After section 43A of the Terrorism Act 2000 insert—“Offenders released on licence: powers in connection with protecting public from risk of terrorism43B Terrorist offenders released on licence: arrest without warrant pending recall decision(1) Subject to subsection (2), a constable may arrest without warrant a terrorist offender who has been released on licence if the constable—(1) 
230	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 10 – Management of offendersCHAPTER 4 – Management of terrorist offendersDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(a) has reasonable grounds for suspecting that the offender has breached a condition of their licence, and(b) reasonably considers that it is necessary, for purposes connected with protecting members of the public from a risk of terrorism, to detain the offender until a recall decision is made.(2) A terrorist offender who is detained under this section must (unless recalled or otherwise detained under any other power) be released—(a) if a recall decision is made not to revoke the offender’s licence (and accordingly the offender is not recalled to prison), as soon as practicable after that decision is made, or(b) if a recall decision has not been made by the end of the relevant period, at the end of that period.(3) Part 1 of Schedule 8 makes provision that applies where a terrorist offender is arrested under this section.(4) In this section “terrorist offender” means—(a) an offender to whom a restricted release provision applies or would apply but for the fact that the offender has been released on licence;(b) a life prisoner within the meaning of Chapter 2 of Part 2 of the Crime (Sentences) Act 1997 (see section 34 of that Act) who is serving a sentence for an offence within section 247A(2) of the Criminal Justice Act 2003;(c) a life prisoner within the meaning of Part 1 of the Prisoners and Criminal Proceedings (Scotland) Act 1993 (see section 27 of that Act) who is serving a sentence, or is subject to an order for lifelong restriction, for an offence within section 1AB(2) of that Act;(d) a life prisoner within the meaning of the Life Sentences (Northern Ireland) Order 2001 (S.I. 2001/2564 (N.I. 2)) (see Article 2 of that Order) who is serving a sentence for an offence within Article 20A(2) of the Criminal Justice (Northern Ireland) Order 2008 (S.I. 2008/1216 (N.I. 1)).(5) For the purposes of this section—(a) a reference to an offender who has been released on licence includes an offender who —(i) has been released temporarily pursuant to rules made under section 47(5) of the Prison Act 1952 or section 13(1)(c) of the Prison Act (Northern Ireland) 1953 (c. 18 (N.I.)), or(ii) has been released temporarily on licence pursuant to rules made under section 39(6) of the Prisons (Scotland) Act 1989;(b) a reference to a condition of an offender’s licence includes a condition to which an offender’s temporary release is subject;(c) a reference to revocation of an offender’s licence includes recall of an offender from temporary release.(6) In this section—  “prison” includes any place where a person is liable to be detained; “recall decision”, in relation to a terrorist offender who has been released on licence, means a decision by any person with the power to  
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32) PART 10 – Management of offendersCHAPTER 4 – Management of terrorist offenders Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
231
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesrevoke the offender’s licence and recall the offender to prison whether or not to exercise that power;the “relevant period” means—(a) in relation to a terrorist offender who has been released on licence under the law of England and Wales, the period of 6 hours beginning with the time of the arrest under this section;(b) in relation to a terrorist offender who has been released on licence under the law of Scotland or Northern Ireland, the period of 12 hours beginning with the time of the arrest under this section;“restricted release provision” means—(a) section 247A of the Criminal Justice Act 2003;(b) section 1AB of the Prisoners and Criminal Proceedings (Scotland) Act 1993;(c) Article 20A of the Criminal Justice (Northern Ireland) Order 2008.(7) A person who has the powers of a constable in one part of the United Kingdom may exercise the power under subsection (1) in any part of the United Kingdom.”(2) In Schedule 8 to the Terrorism Act 2000 (detention)—(a) in the shoulder reference, for “Section 41” substitute “Sections 41 and 43B”;(b) in the heading for Part 1, after “41” insert “or 43B”;(c) in paragraph 1, in sub-paragraphs (1), (2) and (4), after “41” insert “or 43B”;(d) in paragraph 2, before sub-paragraph (1) insert—“(A1) This paragraph applies in the case of a person detained under Schedule 7 or section 41.”;(e) in paragraph 6—(i) in sub-paragraph (1), for the words from “Subject to” to “section 41” substitute “A person detained under Schedule 7 or section 41 or 43B”;(ii) after sub-paragraph (1) insert—“(1A) In the case of a person detained under Schedule 7 or section 41, sub-paragraph (1) is subject to paragraph 8.”;(f) in paragraph 7—(i) in sub-paragraph (1), for the words from “Subject to” to “section 41” substitute “A person detained under Schedule 7 or section 41 or 43B”;(ii) after sub-paragraph (1) insert—“(1A) Sub-paragraph (1) is subject—(a) in the case of a person detained under Schedule 7 or section 41, to paragraphs 8 and 9, and(b) in the case of a person detained under section 43B, to paragraph 9.”;(g) in paragraph 8, before sub-paragraph (1) insert—“(A1) This paragraph does not apply in the case of a person detained under section 43B (except for the purposes of paragraph 9(3)(a)).”;(h) after paragraph 13 insert—(a) 
232	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 10 – Management of offendersCHAPTER 4 – Management of terrorist offendersDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes“13A	No fingerprint, intimate sample or non-intimate sample may be taken from a person detained under section 43B.”;(i) in paragraph 16—(i) in sub-paragraph (1), after “41” insert “or 43B”;(ii) in sub-paragraphs (4) and (7), at the beginning insert “Where a person is detained under Schedule 7 or section 41,”;(j)	in paragraph 18, in sub-paragraphs (1) and (2), after “41” insert “or 43B”.185 Power to search terrorist offenders released on licenceAfter section 43B of the Terrorism Act 2000 insert—“43C Power to search terrorist offenders released on licence(1) A constable may stop and search a terrorist offender who is within subsection (2) if the constable is satisfied that it is necessary to do so for purposes connected with protecting members of the public from a risk of terrorism.(2) A terrorist offender is within this subsection if—(a) the offender has been released on licence (and not recalled), and(b) the offender’s licence includes a search condition.(3) The power in subsection (1) may be exercised in any place to which the constable lawfully has access (whether or not it is a place to which the public has access).(4) Subsection (5) applies if a constable, in exercising the power in subsection (1) to stop a terrorist offender, stops a vehicle (see section 116(2)).(5) The constable may search the vehicle and anything in or on it for purposes connected with protecting members of the public from a risk of terrorism.(6) Nothing in subsection (5) confers a power to search any person, but the power to search in that subsection is in addition to the power in subsection (1) to search a terrorist offender.(7) The power in subsection (1) to search a terrorist offender includes power to search anything carried by the offender.(8) Subsection (5) of section 43B applies for the purposes of this section as it applies for the purposes of that section.(9) In this section—  “search condition” means a condition requiring the offender to submit to a search of their person under this section;“terrorist offender” has the same meaning as in section 43B.
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32) PART 10 – Management of offendersCHAPTER 4 – Management of terrorist offenders Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
233
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(10) A person who has the powers of a constable in one part of the United Kingdom may exercise a power under this section in any part of the United Kingdom.”186 Search of premises of offender released on licence for purposes connected with protection from risk of terrorismAfter section 43C of the Terrorism Act 2000 insert—“43D Search of premises of offender released on licence for purposes connected with protection from risk of terrorism(1) A justice may issue a warrant under this section if, on the application of a senior police officer of the relevant force, the justice is satisfied that the requirements in subsection (2) are met.(2) The requirements are—(a) that the person specified in the application is a relevant offender who has been released on licence (and not recalled),(b) that there are reasonable grounds for believing that the person resides, or may regularly be found, at premises (whether residential or otherwise) specified in the application,(c) that it is necessary, for purposes connected with protecting members of the public from a risk of terrorism, for a constable to enter and search premises specified in the application, and(d) the occupier of the premises is unlikely to consent to a constable entering or searching the premises specified in the application.(3) A warrant under this section must specify each set of premises to which it relates (which are to be premises in relation to which the requirements in subsection (2)(b) to (d) are met).(4) A warrant under this section is a warrant that authorises a constable of the relevant force, for the purposes referred to in subsection (2)(c)—(a) to enter the premises to which it relates, and(b) to search the premises or, if the premises are multiple occupancy premises, the relevant parts of the premises.(5) A warrant under this section may—(a) authorise the constable executing it to use reasonable force if necessary to enter and search the premises;(b) authorise entry to, and search of, the premises on more than one occasion (whether on a certain number of occasions or without limit), so far as the justice who issues the warrant is satisfied that such authorisation is necessary for the purposes referred to in subsection (2) (c).(6) For the purposes of subsection (4)—(1) 
234	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 10 – Management of offendersCHAPTER 4 – Management of terrorist offendersDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(a) “multiple occupancy premises” are premises at which two or more individuals who are not members of the same household reside;(b) the reference to the “relevant parts” of multiple occupancy premises is to those parts of the premises to which the constable has reasonable grounds for believing that the person to whom the warrant relates has access.(7) Subsection (5) of section 43B applies for the purposes of this section as it applies for the purposes of that section.(8) In this section “relevant offender” means—(a) a prisoner to whom Chapter 6 of Part 12 of the Criminal Justice Act 2003 applies (release of fixed-term prisoners);(b) a life prisoner within the meaning of Chapter 2 of Part 2 of the Crime (Sentences) Act 1997 (see section 34 of that Act);(c) a short-term prisoner, long-term prisoner or life prisoner within the meaning of Part 1 of the Prisoners and Criminal Proceedings (Scotland) Act 1993 (see section 27 of that Act);(d) a fixed-term prisoner within the meaning of Chapter 4 of Part 2 of the Criminal Justice (Northern Ireland) Order 2008 (S.I. 2008/1216 (N.I. 1)) (see Article 16 of that Order);(e) a life prisoner within the meaning of the Life Sentences (Northern Ireland) Order 2001 (S.I. 2001/2564 (N.I. 2)) (see Article 2 of that Order).(9) In this section—“justice” means—(a) a justice of the peace in England and Wales,(b) a sheriff or summary sheriff in Scotland, or(c) a lay magistrate in Northern Ireland; “relevant force” means—(a) if the premises specified in the application for the warrant are in England or Wales, the police force maintained for the police area in which those premises are situated,(b) if those premises are in Scotland, the Police Service of Scotland, or(c) if those premises are in Northern Ireland, the Police Service of Northern Ireland;  “senior police officer” means a constable of the rank of superintendent or above.”187 Powers of seizure and retentionAfter section 43D of the Terrorism Act 2000 insert—
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32) PART 10 – Management of offendersCHAPTER 4 – Management of terrorist offenders Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
235
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes“43E Seizure and retention of items found in search under section 43C or 43D(1) This section applies where a constable carries out—(a) a search of a terrorist offender under section 43C(1),(b) a search of a vehicle, or anything in or on a vehicle, under section 43C(5), or(c) a search of premises further to a warrant issued under section 43D.(2) A constable may seize anything that the constable finds in the course of the search if—(a) the constable reasonably suspects that—(i) the thing is or contains evidence in relation to an offence, and(ii) it is necessary to seize it in order to prevent it being concealed, lost, damaged, altered or destroyed, or(b) the constable reasonably believes that it is necessary to do so for the purpose of ascertaining—(i) whether the offender has breached a condition of the offender’s licence, and(ii) if so, whether the breach affects the risk of terrorism to which members of the public are exposed.(3) Anything seized under subsection (2) may be—(a) subjected to tests;(b) retained for as long as is necessary in all the circumstances (but see subsection (5)).(4) In particular (and regardless of the ground on which the thing was seized)—(a) if a constable has reasonable grounds for believing that the thing is or contains evidence in relation to an offence, it may be retained—(i) for use as evidence at a trial for an offence, or(ii) for forensic examination or for investigation in connection with an offence;(b) if a constable has reasonable grounds for believing that the thing has been obtained in consequence of the commission of an offence, it may be retained in order to establish its lawful owner.(5) Anything seized under subsection (2)(b) that is not retained as mentioned in subsection (4)(a) or (b) may be retained for a maximum period of 7 days beginning with the day after the day on which the thing is seized.(6) Nothing may be retained for either of the purposes mentioned in subsection (4)(a) if a photograph or copy would be sufficient for that purpose.(7) In this section “offender” means—(a) in relation to a search under section 43C, the terrorist offender to whom the search relates;(b) in relation to a search under section 43D, the relevant offender in relation to whom the warrant authorising the search was issued.(a) 
236	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 10 – Management of offendersCHAPTER 4 – Management of terrorist offendersDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(8) Nothing in this section affects any power of a court to make an order under section 1 of the Police (Property) Act 1897.”188 Sections 184 to 187: consequential provisionSchedule 19 makes provision that is consequential on sections 184 to 187.189 Arrangements for assessing etc risks posed by certain offenders(1) Section 325 of the Criminal Justice Act 2003 (arrangements for assessing etc risks posed by certain offenders) is amended in accordance with subsections (2) to (6).(2) In subsection (1), in the definition of “relevant sexual or violent offender”, for “has the meaning” substitute “and “relevant terrorist offender” have the meanings”.(3) In subsection (2)—(a) for the “and” at the end of paragraph (a) substitute— “(aa)  relevant terrorist offenders,”(b) at the end of paragraph (b) insert “, and(c) other persons who have committed offences (wherever committed) and are considered by the responsible authority to be persons who may be at risk of involvement in terrorism- related activity.”(4) For subsection (4) substitute—“(4) A person to whom subsection (4A) applies may, for the purpose described in subsection (2), disclose information to another person to whom subsection (4A) applies.(4A) This subsection applies to—(a) the responsible authority,(b) a person specified in subsection (6), and(c) a person who the responsible authority considers may contribute to the achievement of the purpose described in subsection (2).(4B) A disclosure under subsection (4) does not breach—(a) any obligation of confidence owed by the person making the disclosure, or(b) any other restriction on the disclosure of information (however imposed).(4C) But subsection (4) does not authorise a disclosure of information that—
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32) PART 10 – Management of offendersCHAPTER 4 – Management of terrorist offenders Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
237
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(a) would contravene the data protection legislation (but in determining whether it would do so, the power in that subsection is to be taken into account), or(b) would be prohibited by any of Parts 1 to 7 or Chapter 1 of Part 9 of the Investigatory Powers Act 2016.(4D) Subsection (4E) applies if a person who may disclose or receive information by virtue of subsection (4) would not otherwise be a competent authority for the purposes of Part 3 of the Data Protection Act 2018 (law enforcement processing) in relation to the processing by that person of personal data by virtue of that subsection.(4E) The person is to be treated as a competent authority for the purposes of that Part in relation to the processing by that person of personal data by virtue of subsection (4).(4F) But subsection (4E) does not apply to an intelligence service within the meaning of Part 4 of the Data Protection Act 2018 (see section 82(2) of that Act).(4G) Subsections (4) to (4F) do not affect any power to disclose information apart from that conferred by subsection (4).”(5) In subsection (6), in the opening words, after “(3)” insert “, (4A)(b)”.(6) In subsection (9), at the appropriate places insert—  ““the data protection legislation” has the same meaning as in the Data Protection Act 2018 (see section 3 of that Act);”;  ““involvement in terrorism-related activity” has the same meaning as in the Terrorism Prevention and Investigation Measures Act 2011 (see section 4 of that Act);”;  ““personal data” has the same meaning as in the Data Protection Act 2018 (see section 3(2) of that Act);”;  ““processing” has the same meaning as in the Data Protection Act 2018 (see section 3(4) of that Act);”.(7) Section 327 of the Criminal Justice Act 2003 (interpretation of section 325) is amended in accordance with subsections (8) to (10).(8) In subsection (3)—(a) in paragraph (a)—(i) for “is” substitute “has been”, and(ii) after “specified in” insert “Part 1 or 2 of”, and(b) in paragraph (b)—(i) in the words before sub-paragraph (i), for “is” substitute “was”,(ii) in sub-paragraph (i), for “for a term of 12 months or more” substitute “that is not for a term of less than 12 months”, and(iii) after sub-paragraph (v) insert—“(va) a sentence of custody for life under section 93 or 94 of the Powers of Criminal Courts (Sentencing) Act 2000 or under section 272 or 275 of the Sentencing Code,”.
238	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 10 – Management of offendersCHAPTER 4 – Management of terrorist offendersDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(9) In subsection (4)(a), after “specified in” insert “Part 1 or 2 of”.(10) After subsection (4A) insert—“(4B) For the purposes of section 325, a person is a relevant terrorist offender if the person falls within one or both of subsections (4C) and (4D).(4C) A person falls within this subsection if the person is subject to the notification requirements of Part 4 of the Counter-Terrorism Act 2008.(4D) A person falls within this subsection if the person has been convicted of and sentenced for a relevant terrorist offence, or otherwise dealt within in relation to such an offence, as described in—(a) paragraph (a) or (b) of section 45(1) of the Counter-Terrorism Act 2008,(b) paragraph (a) or (b) of section 45(2) of that Act,(c) paragraph (a) or (b) of section 45(3) of that Act, or(d) paragraph (a) or (b) of paragraph 5(1) of Schedule 6 to that Act.(4E) For the purposes of subsection (4D)—(a) any reference in the Counter-Terrorism Act 2008 to an offence to which Part 4 of that Act applies is to be read as if it were a reference to a relevant terrorist offence, and(b) any reference in that Act to a hospital order is to be read as if it included a guardianship order within the meaning of the Mental Health Act 1983 or the Mental Health (Northern Ireland) Order 1986 (S.I. 1986/595 (N.I. 4)).(4F) In subsections (4D) and (4E) “relevant terrorist offence” means—(a) an offence specified in Part 1 or 2 of Schedule 19ZA (terrorism offences punishable with imprisonment for life or for more than two years),(b) a service offence as respects which the corresponding civil offence is so specified, or(c) an offence which was determined to have a terrorist connection (see subsection (4G));and in paragraph (b) “service offence” and “corresponding civil offence” have the same meanings as in the Counter-Terrorism Act 2008 (see section 95 of that Act).(4G) For the purposes of subsection (4F)(c), an offence was determined to have a terrorist connection if it was—(a) determined to have a terrorist connection under—(i) section 69 of the Sentencing Code (including as applied by section 238(6) of the Armed Forces Act 2006),(ii) section 30 of the Counter-Terrorism Act 2008 (in the case of an offender sentenced in England and Wales before the Sentencing Code applied, or an offender sentenced in Northern Ireland but now capable of posing a risk in an area in England and Wales), or(iii) section 32 of that Act (in the case of a person sentenced for a service offence before the Sentencing Code applied), or(i) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32) PART 10 – Management of offendersCHAPTER 5 – Football banning orders Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
239
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(b) proved to have been aggravated by reason of having a terrorist connection under section 31 of the Counter-Terrorism Act 2008 (in the case of an offender sentenced in Scotland but now capable of posing a risk in an area in England and Wales).”CHAPTER 5FOOTBALL BANNING ORDERS190 Football banning orders: relevant offences(1) The Football Spectators Act 1989 is amended as follows.(2) Schedule 1 (football banning orders: relevant offences) is amended in accordance with subsections (3) to (7).(3) In paragraph 1(c) (certain offences under the Public Order Act 1986 committed at premises)—(a) after “any offence under section” insert “4,”, and(b) before “harassment” insert “fear or provocation of violence, or”.(4) In paragraph 1(k) (certain offences under the Public Order Act 1986 committed on a journey to or from a football match)—(a) after “any offence under section” insert “4,”, and(b) before “harassment” insert “fear or provocation of violence, or”.(5) In paragraph 1(q) (certain offences under the Public Order Act 1986 which the court declares to be related to a football match)—(a) after “any offence under section” insert “4,”,(b) before “harassment” insert “fear or provocation of violence, or”, and(c) omit “or any provision of Part 3 or 3A of that Act (hatred by reference to race etc)”.(6) In paragraph 1, after paragraph (u) insert—“(v) any offence under any provision of Part 3 or 3A of the Public Order Act 1986 (hatred by reference to race etc)—(i) which does not fall within paragraph (c) or (k), and(ii) as respects which the court makes a declaration that the offence related to a football match, to a football organisation or to a person whom the accused knew or believed to have a prescribed connection with a football organisation,(w) any offence under section 31 of the Crime and Disorder Act 1998 (racially or religiously aggravated public order offences) as respects which the court makes a declaration that the offence related to a football match, to a football organisation or to a person whom the(w) 
240	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 10 – Management of offendersCHAPTER 5 – Football banning orders Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesaccused knew or believed to have a prescribed connection with a football organisation,(x) any offence under section 1 of the Malicious Communications Act 1988 (offence of sending letter, electronic communication or article with intent to cause distress or anxiety)—(i) which does not fall within paragraph (d), (e), (m), (n), (r) or (s),(ii) as respects which the court has stated that the offence is aggravated by hostility of any of the types mentioned in section 66(1) of the Sentencing Code (racial hostility etc), and(iii) as respects which the court makes a declaration that the offence related to a football match, to a football organisation or to a person whom the accused knew or believed to have a prescribed connection with a football organisation,(y) any offence under section 127(1) of the Communications Act 2003 (improper use of public telecommunications network)—(i) which does not fall within paragraph (d), (e), (m), (n), (r) or (s),(ii) as respects which the court has stated that the offence is aggravated by hostility of any of the types mentioned in section 66(1) of the Sentencing Code (racial hostility etc), and(iii) as respects which the court makes a declaration that the offence related to a football match, to a football organisation or to a person whom the accused knew or believed to have a prescribed connection with a football organisation.”(7) In paragraph 4—(a) the words from “In this Schedule” to “Part II of this Act.” become sub- paragraph (1),(b) after sub-paragraph (1) insert—“(1A) In this Schedule “football organisation” means an organisation which is a regulated football organisation for the purposes of Part 2 of this Act.”, and(c) after sub-paragraph (2) insert—“(3) The provision that may be made by an order made by the Secretary of State for the purposes of this Schedule includes provision that a person has a prescribed connection with a football organisation where—(a) the person has had a connection of a prescribed kind with a football organisation in the past, or(b) the person will or may have a connection of a prescribed kind with a football organisation in the future.”(8) In section 14 (main definitions), after subsection (2) insert—“(2A) “Regulated football organisation” means an organisation (whether in the United Kingdom or elsewhere) which—(a) relates to association football, and(b) is a prescribed organisation or an organisation of a prescribed description.”(a) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32) PART 10 – Management of offendersCHAPTER 5 – Football banning orders Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
241
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(9) Section 23 (further provision about, and appeals against, declarations of relevance) is amended in accordance with subsections (10) and (11).(10) In subsection (1), for the words from “related to football matches” to the end of the subsection substitute “—(a) related to football matches,(b) related to a particular football match or to particular football matches,(c) related to a football organisation, or(d) related to a person whom the defendant knew or believed to have a prescribed connection with a football organisation,as the case may be.”(11) In subsection (5), for the words from “related to football matches” to the end of the subsection substitute “—(a) related to football matches,(b) related to one or more particular football matches,(c) related to a football organisation, or(d) related to a person whom the defendant knew or believed to have a prescribed connection with a football organisation.”(12) This section does not apply in relation to an offence committed before the day appointed by regulations under section 208(1) for its coming into force (so far as it has not previously been commenced by section 208(4)(y)).191 Football banning orders: power to amend list of relevant offences(1) In section 14 of the Football Spectators Act 1989 (main definitions), after subsection (8) insert—“(9) The Secretary of State may by regulations amend paragraph 1 of Schedule 1 so as to add, modify or remove a reference to an offence or a description of offence.(10) Regulations under subsection (9) may make consequential amendments to this Act.(11) A statutory instrument containing regulations under subsection (9) may not be made unless a draft of the instrument has been laid before and approved by a resolution of each House of Parliament.”(2) Section 22A of that Act (other interpretation, etc) is amended in accordance with subsections (3) and (4).(3) In subsection (3), after “order” insert “or regulations”.(4) After subsection (3) insert—
242	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 10 – Management of offendersCHAPTER 5 – Football banning orders Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes“(3A) An order or regulations under this Part—(a) may make different provision for different purposes;(b) may make consequential, supplementary, incidental, transitional, transitory or saving provision.”192 Football banning orders: requirement to make order on conviction etc(1) In section 14A of the Football Spectators Act 1989 (banning order made on conviction of an offence), for subsections (2) and (3) substitute—“(2) The court must make a banning order in respect of the offender unless the court considers that there are particular circumstances relating to the offence or to the offender which would make it unjust in all the circumstances to do so.(3) Where the court does not make a banning order it must state in open court the reasons for not doing so.”(2) Section 22 of that Act (banning orders arising out of offences outside England and Wales) is amended in accordance with subsections (3) and (4).(3) In subsection (4), for the words following paragraph (b) substitute—“must make a banning order in relation to the person, unless subsection (5) applies.”(4) For subsections (5) and (5A) substitute— “(5) This subsection applies if—(a) it appears to the court that the conviction of the corresponding offence in a country outside England and Wales is the subject of proceedings in a court of law in that country questioning the conviction, or(b) the court considers that there are particular circumstances relating to the corresponding offence or to the person which would make it unjust in all the circumstances to make a banning order.(5A) Where the court does not make a banning order on the ground mentioned in subsection (5)(b) it must state in open court the reasons for not doing so.”(5) This section does not apply in relation to an offence committed before the day appointed by regulations under section 208(1) for its coming into force.
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32) PART 11 – Rehabilitation of offendersCHAPTER 5 – Football banning orders Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
243
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesPART 11REHABILITATION OF OFFENDERS193 Rehabilitation of offenders(1) The Rehabilitation of Offenders Act 1974, as it forms part of the law of England and Wales, is amended as follows.(2) Section 5 (rehabilitation periods for particular sentences) is amended in accordance with subsections (3) to (12).(3) In subsection (1) (sentences excluded from rehabilitation)—(a) for paragraph (b) substitute—“(b)  any of the following sentences, where the sentence is imposed for an offence specified in Schedule 18 to the Sentencing Code (serious violent, sexual and terrorism offences) or a service offence as respects which the corresponding offence is so specified—(i) a sentence of imprisonment for a term exceeding 4 years;(ii) a sentence of youth custody for such a term;(iii) a sentence of detention in a young offender institution for such a term;(iv) a sentence of corrective training for such a term;(v) a sentence of detention under section 91 of the Powers of Criminal Courts (Sentencing) Act 2000 for such a term;(vi) a sentence of detention under section 250 or 252A of the Sentencing Code for such a term;(vii) a sentence of detention under section 209 or 224B of the Armed Forces Act 2006 for such a term;(viii) a sentence of detention under section 205ZC(5) or 208 of the Criminal Procedure (Scotland) Act 1995 for such a term;”, and(b) in paragraph (d) omit the words from “or a sentence of detention” to the end of that paragraph (including the “and” at the end of that paragraph).(4) After subsection (1) insert— “(1ZA) In subsection (1)(b)—(a) “service offence” means an offence under—(i) section 42 of the Armed Forces Act 2006,(ii) section 70 of the Army Act 1955 or Air Force Act 1955, or(iii) section 42 of the Naval Discipline Act 1957, and(b) “corresponding offence” means—(i) in relation to an offence under section 42 of the Armed Forces Act 2006, the corresponding offence under the law of England and Wales within the meaning of that section;(i) 
244	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 11 – Rehabilitation of offendersCHAPTER 5 – Football banning orders Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(ii) in relation to an offence under section 70 of the Army Act 1955 or the Air Force Act 1955, the corresponding civil offence within the meaning of that Act;(iii) in relation to an offence under section 42 of the Naval Discipline Act 1957, the civil offence within the meaning of that section.(1ZB) Section 48 of the Armed Forces Act 2006 (supplementary provisions relating to ancillary service offences) applies for the purposes of subsection (1ZA)(b)(i) as it applies for the purposes of the provisions of that Act referred to in subsection (3)(b) of that section.”(5) In subsection (2) (rehabilitation periods), in the words before paragraph (a), for “(3) and” substitute “(2A) to”.(6) In the table in subsection (2)(b) (rehabilitation periods)—(a) for the three rows relating to custodial sentences substitute—“A custodial sentence of more than 4 yearsThe end of the period of 7 years beginning with the day on which the sentence (including any licence period) is completedThe end of the period of 42 months beginning with the day on which the sentence (including any licence period) is completedA custodial sentence of more than 1 year and up to, or consisting of, 4 yearsThe end of the period of 4 years beginning with the day on which the sentence (including any licence period) is completedThe end of the period of 2 years beginning with the day on which the sentence (including any licence period) is completedA custodial sentence of 1 year or lessThe end of the period of 12 months beginning with the day on which the sentence (including any licence period) is completedThe end of the period of 6 months beginning with the day on which the sentence (including any licence period) is completed”;(b) omit the row relating to a community or youth rehabilitation order.(7) After subsection (2) (and after the table in subsection (2)(b)) insert—“(2A) Subsection (2B) applies where provision is made by or under a relevant order for the order to have effect—(a) until further order,(b) until the occurrence of a specified event, or(c) otherwise for an indefinite period.(2B) The rehabilitation period for the order is the period—(a) beginning with the date of the conviction in respect of which the order is imposed, and(b) ending when the order ceases to have effect.”(8) For subsection (3) (rehabilitation period for community etc order which does not provide for the last day on which the order has effect) substitute—(1) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32) PART 11 – Rehabilitation of offendersCHAPTER 5 – Football banning orders Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
245
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes“(3) The rehabilitation period for a relevant order which is not otherwise dealt with in the Table or under subsections (2A) and (2B) is the period of 24 months beginning with the date of conviction.”(9) In subsection (4)(b) (rehabilitation period for other sentences), for “subsection (3)” substitute “any of subsections (2A) to (3)”.(10) In subsection (7), in the words before paragraph (a), for “For” substitute “Subject to subsection (7A), for”.(11) After subsection (7) insert—“(7A) Subsection (7)(a) or (b) does not apply for the purposes of determining whether a sentence is excluded from rehabilitation by virtue of subsection (1) (b).(7B) For the purposes of this section, a sentence imposed as mentioned in subsection (7)(f) for an offence—(a) under the law of Scotland, Northern Ireland or a country or territory outside the United Kingdom, and(b) which would have constituted an offence specified in Schedule 18 to the Sentencing Code if it had been committed in England and Wales,is to be treated as a sentence for an offence specified in that Schedule (and for this purpose an act punishable under the law in force in a country or territory outside the United Kingdom constitutes an offence under that law, however it is described in that law).”(12) In subsection (8) (interpretation), in the definition of “relevant order”—(a) before paragraph (a) insert—“(za) a community or youth rehabilitation order,”, and(b) for paragraph (g) substitute— “(g) any order which—(i) imposes a disqualification, disability, prohibition, penalty, requirement or restriction, or(ii) is otherwise intended to regulate the behaviour of the person convicted,and is not otherwise dealt with in the Table,”.(13) In section 6(5) (the rehabilitation period applicable to a conviction), for the words from “by virtue of” to “or other penalty” substitute “to an order within paragraph (g) of the definition of “relevant order” in section 5(8) above”.(14) In section 7(1)(d) (limitations on rehabilitation under the Act), for “or other penalty” substitute “, penalty, requirement, restriction or other regulation of the person’s behaviour”.(15) In paragraph 5(b) of Schedule 2 (protection for spent cautions), after “prohibition” insert “, requirement”.(16) This section applies in relation to convictions before the day on which this section comes into force (“the commencement day”) as well as in relation to convictions on or after that day.(1) 
246	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 12 – Disregards and pardons for certain historical offencesCHAPTER 5 – Football banning orders Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(17) The Rehabilitation of Offenders Act 1974 (“the 1974 Act”) applies in relation to convictions before the commencement day as if the amendments made by this section had always had effect.(18) Where by virtue of subsection (17)—(a) a person would, before the commencement day, have been treated for the purposes of the 1974 Act as a rehabilitated person in respect of a conviction, or(b) a conviction would, before that day, have been treated for the purposes of that Act as spent,the person or conviction concerned is (subject to any order made by virtue of section 4(4) or 7(4) of that Act) to be so treated on and after that day.PART 12DISREGARDS AND PARDONS FOR CERTAIN HISTORICAL OFFENCES194 Disregard of certain convictions or cautions(1) The Protection of Freedoms Act 2012 is amended in accordance with subsections (2) to (10).(2) Section 92 (power of Secretary of State to disregard convictions or cautions) is amended in accordance with subsections (3) to (5).(3) In subsection (1) for the words from “under” to the end of paragraph (c) substitute “in circumstances where the conduct constituting the offence was sexual activity between persons of the same sex”.(4) In subsection (3)—(a) in paragraph (a)—(i) for the first “the” substitute “any”,(ii) for “conduct constituting the offence consented to it and” substitute “sexual activity”, and(iii) omit the second “and”, and(b) for paragraph (b) substitute—“(b) the offence has been repealed or, in the case of an offence at common law, abolished by enactment (whether or not it has been re-enacted or replaced), and(c) the sexual activity would not, if occurring in the same circumstances at the point of decision, constitute an offence.”(5) After subsection (6) insert—“(7) In this section “sexual activity” includes—(a) any physical or affectionate activity which is of a type characteristic of people involved in an intimate personal relationship, and(a) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 12 – Disregards and pardons for certain historical offences CHAPTER 5 – Football banning ordersDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
247
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(b) conduct intended to lead to sexual activity.”(6) In section 93(3) (applications to the Secretary of State), for the words from “the matters” to the end substitute “—(a) whether a conviction or caution is of a kind mentioned in section 92(1);(b) the matters mentioned in condition A in that section.”(7) In section 94 (procedure for decisions by the Secretary of State)—(a) in subsection (1)—(i) after “considering” insert “whether a conviction or caution is of a kind mentioned in section 92(1) or”, and(ii) for “section 92” substitute “that section”,(b) in subsection (2)—(i) after “deciding” insert “whether a conviction or caution is of a kind mentioned in section 92(1) or”, and(ii) for “section 92” substitute “that section”,(c) after subsection (2) insert—“(2A) If the Secretary of State refuses an application on the basis that the caution or conviction is not of a kind mentioned in section 92(1), the Secretary of State must—(a) record the decision in writing, and(b) give notice of it to the applicant.”(8) In section 99 (appeal against refusal to disregard convictions or cautions)—(a) in subsection (1)(a) after “Secretary of State” insert “refuses an application on the basis mentioned in section 94(2A) or”,(b) in subsection (3), for the words from “that it” to the end substitute “—(a) that the conviction or caution is of a kind mentioned in section 92(1), it must make an order to that effect;(b) that it appears as mentioned in condition A of that section, it must make an order to that effect.”, and(c) in subsection (5), after “subsection (3)” insert “(b)”.(9) In section 100(1) (advisers)—(a) for the second “Secretary of State” substitute “Secretary of State—(a) the caution or conviction is of a kind mentioned in section 92(1), or”,(b) the remaining text becomes paragraph (b), and(c) in that paragraph for “section 92” substitute “that section”.(10) In section 101—(a) in subsection (1)—(i) in paragraph (a) of the definition of “conviction”, after “proceedings” insert “(including anything that under section 376(1) and (2) of the Armed Forces Act 2006 is to be treated as a conviction for the purposes of that Act)”,(ii) at the end of the definition of “sentence” insert “(including anything that under section 376(1) and (3) of the Armed Forces Act 2006 is to be treated as a sentence for the purposes of that Act),”,(i) 
248	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 12 – Disregards and pardons for certain historical offencesCHAPTER 5 – Football banning orders Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(iii) at the end of paragraph (a) of the definition of “service disciplinary proceedings” omit “or”,(iv) after paragraph (b) of the definition of “service disciplinary proceedings” insert “, or(c) in respect of a service offence (whether or not before a court but excepting proceedings before a civilian court within the meaning of the Armed Forces Act 2006);”and for the purposes of paragraph (c) “service offence” means a service offence within the meaning of the Armed Forces Act 2006, or an SDA offence within the meaning of the Armed Forces Act 2006 (Transitional Provisions etc) Order 2009 (SI 2009/1059).”, and(v) in the appropriate place insert—““enactment” includes an enactment contained in subordinate legislation (within the meaning of the Interpretation Act 1978),”,(b) omit subsections (3) and (4),(c) in subsection (5) for paragraphs (a) and (b) substitute “a reference to an inchoate or ancillary offence relating to the offence.”,(d) in subsection (6)—(i) for the first “or incitement” substitute “, incitement, encouraging or assisting”, and(ii) for the second “or incitement” substitute “, incitement, encouraging or assisting”,(e) after subsection (6) insert—“(6A) For the purposes of section 92, an inchoate or ancillary offence is to be treated as repealed or abolished to the extent that the offence to which it relates is repealed or abolished.(6B) A reference to an inchoate or ancillary offence in relation to an offence is a reference to an offence of—(a) attempting, conspiracy or incitement to commit the offence,(b) encouraging or assisting the commission of the offence, or(c) aiding, abetting, counselling or procuring the commission of the offence.(6C) For the purposes of section 92, an offence under an enactment mentioned in subsection (6D) is to be treated as repealed to the extent that the conduct constituting the offence under the enactment—(a) was punishable by reference to an offence under the law of England and Wales which has been repealed or abolished, or(b) if the conduct was not punishable by the law of England and Wales, was punishable by reference to equivalent conduct constituting an offence under the law of England and Wales which has been repealed or abolished.(6D) The enactments are—(a) section 45 of the Naval Discipline Act 1866,(b) section 41 of the Army Act 1881,(c) section 41 of the Air Force Act 1917,(a) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 12 – Disregards and pardons for certain historical offences CHAPTER 5 – Football banning ordersDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
249
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(d) section 70 of the Army Act 1955,(e) section 70 of the Air Force Act 1955,(f) section 42 of the Naval Discipline Act 1957, and(g) section 42 of the Armed Forces Act 2006.”, and(f) in subsection (7) for “(5) and (6)” substitute “(5), (6) and (6B)”.(11) Nothing in this section affects the disregard of a conviction or caution that was disregarded before this section comes into force.195 Pardons for certain convictions or cautions(1) The Policing and Crime Act 2017 is amended in accordance with subsections (2) to (13).(2) Section 164 (posthumous pardons for convictions etc. of certain abolished offences) is amended in accordance with subsections (3) to (10).(3) Before subsection (1) insert—“(A1) Subsection (1) applies in relation to a person—(a) who was convicted of, or cautioned for, an offence in circumstances where the conduct constituting the offence was sexual activity between persons of the same sex, and(b) who died before the end of the period of twelve months beginning with—(i) the day on which section 194 of the Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 comes into force, or(ii) if later, the day on which the offence referred to in paragraph (a) became an abolished offence (see subsection (1A)).”(4) For subsection (1) substitute—“(1) The person is pardoned for the offence if—(a) any other person involved in the sexual activity was aged 16 or over, and(b) the offence has become an abolished offence.(1A) An offence becomes an abolished offence at the point at which conditions A and B are first met.(1B) Condition A is that the offence has been repealed or, in the case of an offence at common law, abolished by enactment (whether or not it was re-enacted or replaced).(1C) Condition B is that the sexual activity referred to in subsection (A1)(a) would not, if occurring in the same circumstances, constitute an offence.”
250	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 12 – Disregards and pardons for certain historical offencesCHAPTER 5 – Football banning orders Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(5) Omit subsections (2) to (6).(6) In subsection (7)—(a) for “subsection (8)” substitute “subsections (8) and (8A)”, and(b) at the end of paragraph (b) insert “(but as if the reference in subsections (6A) and (6C) to section 92 were a reference to this section)”.(7) In subsection (8) (as amended by section 19 of the Armed Forces Act 2021)—(a) omit paragraph (ba),(b) at the end of paragraph (c) omit “or”,(c) after paragraph (c) (but before paragraph (d) inserted by section 19(3)(d) of the Armed Forces Act 2021) insert—“(ca) the Mutiny Act 1878, the Marine Mutiny Act 1878, any Act previously in force corresponding to either of those Acts or any relevant Articles of War, or”.(8) After subsection (8) insert—“(8A) Section 101(6D) of the 2012 Act is to be read, in its application to this section by virtue of subsection (7) of this section, as if the enactments listed in that subsection included—(a) Article 2 of Section 20 of the Articles of War of 1749 (offences triable by courts martial outside Great Britain),(b) section 38 of the Naval Discipline Act 1860,(c) section 38 of the Naval Discipline Act 1861,(d) section 41 of the Naval Discipline Act 1864,(e) Article 93 of Section 2 of the Articles of War of 1876 (offences not specified in Marine Mutiny Act or Articles of War),(f) section 41 of the Army Discipline and Regulation Act 1879, and(g) any provision corresponding to the provision mentioned in paragraphs (a) or (e), contained in other relevant Articles of War.”(9) In subsection (10) (inserted by section 19 of the Armed Forces Act 2021) insert in the appropriate place—““sexual activity” includes—(a) any physical or affectionate activity which is of a type characteristic of people involved in an intimate personal relationship, and(b) conduct intended to lead to sexual activity.”(10) After subsection (10) insert—“(11) Subsection (1) does not apply in relation to an offence for which the person has previously been pardoned under this section or section 165.”(11) In section 165(1) (other pardons for convictions etc. of certain abolished offences) after “offence” insert “in the circumstances”.(12) Omit section 166 (power to provide disregards and pardons for additional abolished offences).(13) In section 167 (sections 164 to 166: supplementary)—(a) in the opening words of subsection (1) omit “, or under regulations under 166,”, and(a) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32) PART 13 – Procedures in courts and tribunals CHAPTER 5 – Football banning ordersDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
251
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(b) in subsection (2)—(i) for “sections 164 to 166” substitute “section 164 or 165”, and(ii) omit “or regulations under section 166”.(14) Nothing in this section affects a pardon for a conviction or caution which took effect before this section comes into force.(15) In section 19 of the Armed Forces Act 2021 (posthumous pardons in relation to certain abolished offences), omit subsection (2) and paragraphs (b) and (c) of subsection (3).PART 13PROCEDURES IN COURTS AND TRIBUNALSJuries196 British Sign Language interpreters for deaf jurors(1) The Juries Act 1974 is amended as follows.(2) After section 9B insert—“9C British Sign Language interpreters for deaf jurors(1) For the purpose of section 9B(2), in determining whether or not a person who is deaf should act as a juror, the judge must consider whether the assistance of a British Sign Language interpreter would enable that person to be capable of acting effectively as a juror.(2) Where the judge considers that the assistance of a British Sign Language interpreter would enable the person to be capable of acting effectively as a juror, the judge may appoint one or more interpreters to provide that assistance, and affirm the summons.(3) An interpreter appointed under subsection (2) may remain with the jury in the course of their deliberations in proceedings before a court for the purpose of enabling the person the interpreter is assisting to act effectively as a juror.(4) The interpreter must not interfere in or influence the deliberations of the jury (see section 20I as to the offence).”(3) After section 20G insert—(1) 
252	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 13 – Procedures in courts and tribunalsCHAPTER 5 – Football banning orders Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes“20H Application of certain provisions to British Sign Language interpreters(1) Section 12(1) and (2) (challenge for cause) apply to an interpreter appointed under section 9C(2) as those provisions apply to jurors.(2) Section 15A (surrender of electronic communications devices) applies to an interpreter appointed under section 9C(2) as it applies to members of a jury.(3) Section 20A (offence of research by jurors) applies to an interpreter appointed under section 9C(2) as it applies to members of a jury with the modification that the reference to “the trial period” in subsection (5), in relation to an interpreter, is the period—(a) beginning when the interpreter is appointed under section 9C(2), and(b) ending when the judge discharges the jury or, if earlier, when the judge discharges the interpreter.(4) Section 20B (offence of sharing research with other jurors) applies to an interpreter appointed under section 9C(2) as it applies to members of a jury, but the references in section 20B to “section 20A” and “the trial period” are to be read as references to “section 20A” and “the trial period” as modified by subsection (3) of this section.(5) In the following provisions of section 20F (exceptions to offence of disclosing jury deliberations), the references to the conduct of a juror include the conduct of an interpreter appointed under section 9C(2)—(a) subsection (1)(b)(ii);(b) subsection (4)(b);(c) subsection (5).20I Offence: interpreters interfering in or influencing jury deliberations(1) It is an offence for an interpreter appointed under section 9C(2) intentionally to interfere in or influence the deliberations of the jury in proceedings before a court.(2) A person guilty of an offence under this section is liable, on conviction on indictment, to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 2 years or a fine (or both).(3) Proceedings for an offence under this section may only be instituted by or with the consent of the Attorney General.”(4) In section 22(A1) (offences which do not affect contempt of court at common law) for “or 20C” substitute “, 20C or 20I”.
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 7ZA – Transmission and recording of court and tribunal proceedings CHAPTER 5 – Football banning ordersDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
253
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes197 Continuation of criminal trial on death or discharge of a jurorIn section 16 of the Juries Act 1974 (continuation of criminal trial on death or discharge of juror)—(a) in subsection (1) for “subsections (2) and (3)” substitute “subsection (3)”, and(b) omit subsection (2) (trials for offences punishable with death).Transmission and recording of court and tribunal proceedings198 Remote observation and recording of court and tribunal proceedings(1) In the Courts Act 2003, after section 85 insert—“PART 7ZATRANSMISSION AND RECORDING OF COURT AND TRIBUNAL PROCEEDINGSRemote observation and recording85A Remote observation and recording of proceedings by direction of a court or tribunal(1) This section applies (subject to subsections (12) and (13)) to proceedings in any court; and in this section “court” has the same meaning as in the Contempt of Court Act 1981 (see section 19 of that Act).(2) If the proceedings are specified under subsection (8)(a), the court may direct that images or sounds of the proceedings are to be transmitted electronically for the purpose of enabling persons not taking part in the proceedings to watch or listen to the proceedings.(3) A direction under subsection (2) may authorise only the following types of transmission—(a) transmission to designated live-streaming premises, or(b) transmission to which individuals are given access only having first identified themselves to the court (or to a person acting on behalf of the court).(4) In subsection (3)(a), “designated live-streaming premises” means premises that are designated by the Lord Chancellor as premises that are made available for members of the public to watch or listen to proceedings in accordance with directions under subsection (2).(5) A direction under subsection (2) may include further provision about—(a) the manner of transmission, or(a) 
254	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 7ZA – Transmission and recording of court and tribunal proceedingsCHAPTER 5 – Football banning orders Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(b) the persons who are to be able to watch or listen to the transmission (including provision making that ability subject to conditions, or aimed at preventing persons who are not meant to watch or listen from being able to do so).(6) If images or sounds of the proceedings are transmitted electronically (whether under a direction under subsection (2) or any other power), the court may direct that a recording of the transmission is to be made, in the manner specified in the direction, for the purpose of enabling the court to keep a record of the proceedings.(7) A direction under subsection (2) or (6)—(a) may relate to the whole, or to part, of the proceedings concerned, and(b) may be varied or revoked.(8) The Lord Chancellor may by regulations—(a) specify proceedings (by reference to their type, the court in which they take place, or any other circumstance) in relation to which directions under subsection (2) may be made;(b) specify matters of which the court must be satisfied before deciding to make such a direction;(c) specify matters that the court must take into account when deciding whether, and on what terms, to make such a direction;(d) require directions under subsection (2) to include certain provision under subsection (5).(9) Before making regulations under subsection (8), the Lord Chancellor must determine whether the function of giving or withholding concurrence to the regulations would most appropriately be exercised by—(a) the Lord Chief Justice of England and Wales,(b) the Senior President of Tribunals, or(c) both of them.(10) Regulations under subsection (8) may be made only with the concurrence of the Lord Chief Justice of England and Wales, the Senior President of Tribunals, or both of them, as determined under subsection (9).(11) Regulations under subsection (8) may make different provision for different purposes.(12) This section does not apply to proceedings in the Supreme Court.(13) This section does not apply to proceedings if provision regulating the procedure to be followed in those proceedings could be made by—(a) an Act of the Scottish Parliament,(b) an Act of Senedd Cymru (including one passed with the consent of a Minister of the Crown within the meaning of section 158(1) of the Government of Wales Act 2006), or(c) an Act of the Northern Ireland Assembly passed without the consent of the Secretary of State.”(2) In section 41 of the Criminal Justice Act 1925 (prohibition of photography etc in court)—
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 7ZA – Transmission and recording of court and tribunal proceedings CHAPTER 5 – Football banning ordersDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
255
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(a) after subsection (1) insert—“(1ZA) Subsection (1) does not apply to anything done in accordance with a direction under section 85A of the Courts Act 2003 (remote observation and recording of court and tribunal proceedings).”;(b) in subsection (1A), after “provide for” insert “further”.(3) In section 29 of the Criminal Justice Act (Northern Ireland) 1945 (c. 15 (N.I.)) (prohibition of photography etc in court), after subsection (1) insert—“(1A) Subsection (1) does not apply to anything done in accordance with a direction under section 85A of the Courts Act 2003 (remote observation and recording of court and tribunal proceedings).”(4) In section 9 of the Contempt of Court Act 1981 (prohibition of tape recording etc), after subsection (4) insert—“(4A) This section does not apply to anything done in accordance with a direction under section 85A of the Courts Act 2003 (remote observation and recording of court and tribunal proceedings).”(5) In section 108(3) of the Courts Act 2003 (regulations and orders under that Act subject to affirmative procedure), after paragraph (c) insert—“(ca) regulations under section 85A(8) (provision about directions for remote observation of court and tribunal proceedings);”.199 Offence of recording or transmission in relation to remote proceedingsIn the Courts Act 2003, after section 85A (inserted by section 198) insert—“Offence of recording or transmission85B Offence of recording or transmission in relation to remote proceedings(1) It is an offence for a person to make, or attempt to make—(a) an unauthorised recording, or(b) an unauthorised transmission,of an image or sound within subsection (2) or (3).(2) An image or sound is within this subsection if it is an image or sound of court proceedings that is being transmitted to the place where the recording or transmission referred to in subsection (1) is made or attempted to be made.(3) An image or sound is within this subsection if it is an image or sound of a person while that person is remotely attending court proceedings.(4) A person is remotely attending court proceedings at any time when the person—(a) is not in the same place as any member of the court, and(a) 
256	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 7ZA – Transmission and recording of court and tribunal proceedingsCHAPTER 5 – Football banning orders Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(b) is taking part in, watching or listening to the proceedings by way of a transmission.(5) For the purposes of this section a recording or transmission is “unauthorised” unless it is—(a) authorised (generally or specifically) by the court in which the proceedings concerned are being conducted, or(b) authorised (generally or specifically) by the Lord Chancellor.(6) It is a defence for a person charged with an offence under subsection (1) to prove that, at the time of the actual or attempted recording or transmission, the person—(a) was not in designated live-streaming premises, and(b) did not know that the image or sound concerned was of a sort within subsection (2) or (3).(7) In subsection (6)(a), “designated live-streaming premises” has the meaning given by section 85A(4).(8) A person guilty of an offence under subsection (1) is liable on summary conviction to a fine not exceeding level 3 on the standard scale.(9) Conduct that amounts to an offence under subsection (1) is also a contempt of court.But a person cannot, in respect of the same conduct, be both convicted of the offence and punished for the contempt.(10) For the purposes of this section it does not matter whether a person making, or attempting to make, a recording or transmission intends the recording or transmission, or anything comprised in it, to be seen or heard by any other person.(11) This section does not apply to proceedings in the Supreme Court.(12) This section does not apply to court proceedings if provision regulating the procedure to be followed in those proceedings could be made by—(a) an Act of the Scottish Parliament,(b) an Act of Senedd Cymru (including one passed with the consent of a Minister of the Crown within the meaning of section 158(1) of the Government of Wales Act 2006), or(c) an Act of the Northern Ireland Assembly passed without the consent of the Secretary of State.(13) In this section—  “court” has the same meaning as in the Contempt of Court Act 1981 (see section 19 of that Act);“court proceedings” means proceedings in any court; “recording” means a recording on any medium—(a) of a single image, a moving image or any sound, or(b) from which a single image, a moving image or any sound may be produced or reproduced;(a) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 7ZA – Transmission and recording of court and tribunal proceedings CHAPTER 5 – Football banning ordersDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
257
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes  “transmission” means any transmission by electronic means of a single image, a moving image or any sound (and “transmitted” is to be construed accordingly).”200 Expansion of use of video and audio links in criminal proceedings(1) In the Criminal Justice Act 2003, for section 51 substitute—“51 Directions for live links in criminal proceedings(1) The court may, by a direction, require or permit a person to take part in eligible criminal proceedings through—(a) a live audio link, or(b) a live video link.(2) A direction under this section may be given in relation to a member of a jury only if the direction requires all members of the jury to take part through a live video link while present at the same place.(3) In this Part “eligible criminal proceedings” means—(a) a preliminary hearing (see section 56(1)),(b) a summary trial,(c) a criminal appeal to the Crown Court and any proceedings that are preliminary or incidental to such an appeal,(d) a trial on indictment or any other trial in the Crown Court for an offence,(e) proceedings under section 4A or 5 of the Criminal Procedure (Insanity) Act 1964,(f) proceedings under Part 3 of the Mental Health Act 1983,(g) proceedings under—(i) section 11 of the Powers of Criminal Courts (Sentencing) Act 2000, or(ii) section 81(1)(g) of the Senior Courts Act 1981 or section 16 of this Act in respect of a person who has been remanded by a magistrates’ court on adjourning a case under that section of the 2000 Act,(h) an appeal to the criminal division of the Court of Appeal and any proceedings that are preliminary or incidental to such an appeal,(i) a reference to the Court of Appeal by the Attorney General under Part 4 of the Criminal Justice Act 1988 and any proceedings that are preliminary or incidental to such a reference,(j) the hearing of a reference under section 9 or 11 of the Criminal Appeal Act 1995 and any proceedings that are preliminary or incidental to such a hearing,(k) a hearing before a magistrates’ court or the Crown Court which is held after the defendant has entered a plea of guilty,(a) 
258	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 7ZA – Transmission and recording of court and tribunal proceedingsCHAPTER 5 – Football banning orders Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(l) a hearing under section 142(1) or (2) of the Magistrates’ Courts Act 1980,(m) a hearing before the Court of Appeal under section 80 of this Act and any proceedings that are preliminary or incidental to such a hearing,(n) any hearing following conviction held for the purpose of making a decision about bail in respect of the person convicted,(o) a sentencing hearing (see section 56(1)), or(p) an enforcement hearing (see section 56(1)).(4) The court may not give a direction under this section unless—(a) the court is satisfied that it is in the interests of justice for the person to whom the direction relates to take part in the proceedings in accordance with the direction through the live audio link or live video link,(b) the parties to the proceedings have been given the opportunity to make representations, and(c) if so required by section 52(9), the relevant youth offending team has been given the opportunity to make representations.(5) In deciding whether to give a direction under this section, the court must consider—(a) any guidance given by the Lord Chief Justice, and(b) all the circumstances of the case.(6) Those circumstances include in particular—(a) the availability of the person to whom the direction would relate,(b) any need for that person to attend in person,(c) the views of that person,(d) the suitability of the facilities at the place where that person would take part in the proceedings in accordance with the direction,(e) whether that person would be able to take part in the proceedings effectively if the person took part in accordance with the direction,(f) in the case of a direction relating to a witness—(i) the importance of the witness’s evidence to the proceedings, and(ii) whether the direction might tend to inhibit any party to the proceedings from effectively testing the witness’s evidence, and(g) the arrangements that would or could be put in place for members of the public to see or hear the proceedings as conducted in accordance with the direction.”(2) In the Crime and Disorder Act 1998, omit Part 3A (live links in preliminary, sentencing and enforcement hearings).(3) Schedule 20 makes further provision in connection with the provision made by subsections (1) and (2).(1) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 7ZA – Transmission and recording of court and tribunal proceedings CHAPTER 5 – Football banning ordersDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
259
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes201 Repeal of temporary provision(1) In the Coronavirus Act 2020, sections 53 and 54 and Schedules 23 and 24 (which make temporary modifications that are superseded by the provision made by section 200) are repealed.(2) In the Coronavirus Act 2020, section 55 and Schedule 25 (which make temporary modifications that are superseded by the provision made by sections 198 and 199) are repealed.202 Expedited procedure for initial regulations about remote observation of proceedings(1) This section applies in relation to the first regulations made under section 85A(8) of the Courts Act 2003 (as inserted by section 198(1)).(2) The regulations may be made without a draft of the instrument containing them having been laid before and approved by a resolution of each House of Parliament (notwithstanding section 108(3) of the Courts Act 2003).(3) If regulations are made in reliance on subsection (2), the statutory instrument containing them must be laid before Parliament after being made.(4) Regulations contained in a statutory instrument laid before Parliament under subsection (3) cease to have effect at the end of the period of 28 days beginning with the day on which the instrument is made unless, during that period, the instrument is approved by a resolution of each House of Parliament.(5) In calculating the period of 28 days, no account is to be taken of any whole days that fall within a period during which—(a) Parliament is dissolved or prorogued, or(b) either House of Parliament is adjourned for more than four days.(6) If regulations cease to have effect as a result of subsection (4), that does not—(a) affect the validity of anything previously done under or by virtue of the regulations, or(b) prevent the making of new regulations.
260	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 14 – Final provisionsCHAPTER 5 – Football banning orders Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesPART 14FINAL PROVISIONS203 Financial provisionThere is to be paid out of money provided by Parliament—(a) any expenditure incurred under or by virtue of this Act by a Minister of the Crown, government department or other public authority, and(b) any increase attributable to this Act in the sums payable under any other Act out of money so provided.204 Minor amendments arising out of sentencing consolidationSchedule 21 makes minor amendments to the Sentencing Act 2020 and other enactments in connection with the consolidation that led to that Act.205 Power to make consequential provision(1) The Secretary of State may by regulations made by statutory instrument make provision that is consequential on this Act.(2) Regulations under subsection (1) may, in particular, amend, repeal or revoke any enactment passed or made before, or in the same Session as, this Act.(3) In subsection (2) “enactment” includes—(a) an enactment contained in subordinate legislation within the meaning of the Interpretation Act 1978,(b) an enactment contained in, or in an instrument made under, an Act or Measure of Senedd Cymru,(c) an enactment contained in, or in an instrument made under, an Act of the Scottish Parliament, and(d) an enactment contained in, or in an instrument made under, Northern Ireland legislation.(4) Regulations under subsection (1)—(a) may make different provision for different purposes;(b) may make transitional, transitory or saving provision.(5) A statutory instrument containing (whether alone or with any other provision) regulations under subsection (1) which amend, repeal or revoke primary legislation may not be made unless a draft of the instrument has been laid before, and approved by a resolution of, each House of Parliament.(1) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32) PART 14 – Final provisionsCHAPTER 5 – Football banning orders Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
261
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(6) Any other statutory instrument containing regulations under subsection (1) is subject to annulment in pursuance of a resolution of either House of Parliament.(7) In this section “primary legislation” means—(a) an Act of Parliament,(b) an Act or Measure of Senedd Cymru,(c) an Act of the Scottish Parliament, or(d) Northern Ireland legislation.206 Power to state effect in Sentencing Act 2020 of commencement of amendments made by this ActThe power in section 419(1) of the Sentencing Act 2020 (power to state effect of commencement provisions) applies in relation to any amendment or repeal made by or under this Act of that Act as it applies in relation to an amendment or repeal made by Schedule 22 to that Act.207 Extent(1) This Act extends to England and Wales only, subject to the following provisions of this section.(2) The following provisions extend to England and Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland—(a) section 1;(b) sections 37 to 44 (and Schedule 3);(c) section 56(2);(d) section 202;(e) this Part, other than section 204 (and Schedule 21).(3) Sections 89(3) to (7), 141 and 143 extend to England and Wales and Scotland.(4) Section 161 extends to England and Wales and Northern Ireland.(5) A provision of this Act which amends, repeals or revokes an enactment has the same extent within the United Kingdom as the enactment amended, repealed or revoked, subject to subsections (6) to (9).(6) The following provisions extend to England and Wales only—(a) section 54;(b) sections 79, 81 and 83;(c) section 85;(a) 
262	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 14 – Final provisionsCHAPTER 5 – Football banning orders Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(d) section 90;(e) section 165;(f) sections 168 and 169;(g) section 193;(h) in Schedule 11, the amendments to the Rehabilitation of Offenders Act 1974 and the Police Act 1997.(7) Sections 198 and 199 extend to England and Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland.(8) In Schedule 18—(a) paragraphs 4 and 6 extend to England and Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland, and(b) paragraph 5 extends to England and Wales and Scotland only.(9) Section 170 extends to Scotland only.(10) Nothing in the preceding provisions of this section limits the extent within the United Kingdom of any provision made, or inserted, by or under this Act so far as it is applied (by whatever words) by or under the Armed Forces Act 2006.(11) Subsections (1) and (2) of section 384 of the Armed Forces Act 2006 (extent outside the United Kingdom) apply to the armed forces provisions as those subsections apply to the provisions of that Act.(12) The following are “armed forces provisions”—(a) a provision made, or inserted, by or under this Act so far as it is applied (by whatever words) by or under the Armed Forces Act 2006;(b) an amendment, modification or repeal made by or under this Act of—(i) a provision of or made under the Armed Forces Act 2006,(ii) a provision that amends, modifies or repeals a provision of, or made under, that Act, or(iii) any other provision, so far as the provision is applied (by whatever words) by or under that Act.208 Commencement(1) Except as provided by subsections (4) and (5), this Act comes into force on such day as the Secretary of State may by regulations made by statutory instrument appoint.(2) Regulations under subsection (1) may appoint different days for different purposes or areas.(3) Subsection (1) is subject to sections 34, 161 and 166.(4) The following provisions of this Act come into force on the day on which this Act is passed—(a) section 4 for the purposes of making regulations;(a) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32) PART 14 – Final provisionsCHAPTER 5 – Football banning orders Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
263
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(b) sections 8 to 12 (and Schedules 1 and 2) for the purposes of making regulations;(c) section 13;(d) section 14 for the purposes of making regulations;(e) section 19 for the purposes of issuing guidance;(f) section 20 for the purposes of making regulations;(g) sections 22 and 23;(h) sections 24 to 26 for the purposes of making regulations;(i) section 31;(j) section 32 for the purposes of issuing guidance;(k) sections 34 to 36;(l) section 71;(m) section 72;(n) section 82 for the purposes of making regulations;(o) section 90 for the purposes of making regulations;(p) section 132;(q) sections 140 to 143;(r) section 161(1) so far as relating to Part 2 of Schedule 17 (and that Part of that Schedule) for the purposes of making regulations;(s) section 161(2) to (9);(t) sections 163 and 164;(u) section 165 for the purposes of issuing guidance and making regulations;(v) section 166;(w) section 167(2) to (4);(x) section 189;(y) section 190 for the purposes of making an order;(z) section 191;(aa)	sections 198 and 199;(ab)	section 202;(ac)	this Part other than section 204 and Schedule 21.(5) The following provisions of this Act come into force at the end of the period of two months beginning with the day on which this Act is passed—(a) section 2;(b) section 3;(c) sections 47 and 50;(d) section 51 (and Schedule 5);(e) sections 52 and 53;(f) section 54;(g) section 58;(h) section 59;(i) sections 83 to 88 (and Schedule 8);(j) sections 122 and 123;(k) section 124 (and Schedule 12);(l) sections 125 to 128;(m) sections 130 and 131;(a) 
264	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)PART 14 – Final provisionsCHAPTER 5 – Football banning orders Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(n) section 135;(o) section 138;(p) sections 144 to 148;(q) sections 150 and 151;(r) section 153 (and Schedule 14);(s) section 154 (and Schedule 15);(t) sections 157 to 160 (and Schedule 16);(u) section 161(1) so far as relating to Parts 1, 4 and 5 of Schedule 17 (and those Parts of that Schedule);(v) section 162;(w) sections 184 to 188 (and Schedule 19);(x) sections 196 and 197;(y) section 200 (and Schedule 20);(z) section 201(1);(aa)	section 204 (and Schedule 21).(6) The Secretary of State may by regulations made by statutory instrument make transitional, transitory or saving provision in connection with the coming into force of any provision of this Act.209 Short titleThis Act may be cited as the Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022.
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32) SCHEDULE 1 – Specified authorities and local government areas Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
265
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesSCHEDULES SCHEDULE 1	Section 11SPECIFIED AUTHORITIES AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT AREASLOCAL GOVERNMENTSpecified authorityLocal government areaA district councilThe districtA county council in England for an area for which there are no district councilsThe district which coincides with the council’s area or, if there is no such district, each district within the council’s areaAny other county council in EnglandEach district which falls within the council’s areaA London borough councilThe London boroughThe Common Council of the City of London in its capacity as a local authorityThe City of LondonThe Council of the Isles of ScillyThe Isles of ScillyA county council in WalesThe countyA county borough council in WalesThe county boroughCRIMINAL JUSTICESpecified authorityLocal government areaA provider of probation services within the meaning given by section 3(6) of the Offender Management Act 2007Each local government area in which the provider operatesA youth offending team established under section 39 of the Crime and Disorder Act 1998Each local government area which is, or which falls within, the area of each local authority which established the team
266	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)SCHEDULE 1 – Specified authorities and local government areasDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesHEALTH AND SOCIAL CARESpecified authorityLocal government area[F8An	integrated	care	board	established	under section 14Z25] of the National Health Service Act 2006Each local government area which, or any part of which, coincides with or falls within [F9the board’s] areaA Local Health Board established under section 11 of the National Health Service (Wales) Act 2006Each local government area which, or any part of which, coincides with or falls within the Board’s areaPOLICESpecified authorityLocal government areaA chief officer of police for a police area in England and WalesEach local government area which coincides with or falls within the police areaFIRE AND RESCUE AUTHORITIESSpecified authorityLocal government areaA fire and rescue authority constituted by a scheme under section 2 of the Fire and Rescue Services Act 2004 or a scheme to which section 4 of that Act appliesEach local government area which, or any part of which, coincides with or falls within the authority’s areaA fire and rescue authority created by an order under section 4A of the Fire and Rescue Services Act 2004Each local government area which, or any part of which, coincides with or falls within the authority’s areaA metropolitan county fire and rescue authorityEach district which falls within the authority’s areaThe London Fire CommissionerEach London borough and the City of London
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32) SCHEDULE 2 – Educational, prison and youth custody authorities Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
267
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesSCHEDULE 2	Section 12EDUCATIONAL, PRISON AND YOUTH CUSTODY AUTHORITIESEDUCATIONAL AUTHORITIESEducational authorityLocal government areaThe governing body of—(a) a community, foundation or voluntary school, or(b) a community or foundation special school,other than a school which is used wholly for the purpose of providing education for children who are under compulsory school ageEach local government area in which the school is locatedThe proprietor (within the meaning given by section 579(1) of the Education Act 1996) of—(a) an Academy school,(b) a 16 to 19 Academy, or(c) an alternative provision AcademyEach local government area in which the Academy is locatedThe proprietor (within the meaning given by section 579(1) of the Education Act 1996) of any school that has been approved under section 342 of the Education Act 1996, other than a school which is used wholly for the purpose of providing education for children who are under compulsory school ageEach local government area in which the school is locatedThe proprietor (within the meaning given by section 138(1) of the Education and Skills Act 2008) of any other independent educational institution registered under section 95(1) of that ActEach local government area in which the educational institution is locatedThe proprietor (within the meaning given by section 579(1) of the Education Act 1996) of any other independent school registered under section 158 of the Education Act 2002Each local government area in which the school is locatedThe governing body of an educational establishment maintained by a local authority in WalesEach local government area in which the educational establishment is locatedThe management committee of a pupil referral unitEach local government area in which the pupil referral unit is locatedAny other provider of education or training to which Chapter 3 of Part 8 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006 applies, other than a provider that—Each local government area in which education or training is provided by that provider
268	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)SCHEDULE 2 – Educational, prison and youth custody authoritiesDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesEducational authorityLocal government area(a) is registered under the register maintained by theOffice for Students under section 3 of the Higher Education and Research Act 2017, and(b) is not an institution within the further education sector as defined by section 91(3) of the Further and Higher Education Act 1992.PRISON AUTHORITIESPrison authorityLocal government areaThe governor of a prison in England and Wales (or, in the case of a contracted out prison within the meaning given by section 84(4) of the Criminal Justice Act 1991, its director)The local government area in which the prison is locatedYOUTH CUSTODY AUTHORITIESYouth custody authorityLocal government areaThe governor of a young offender institution (or, in the case of a contracted out young offender institution within the meaning given by sections 84(4) and 92(1) of the Criminal Justice Act 1991, its director)The local government area in which the young offender institution is locatedThe governor of a secure training centre (or, in the case of a contracted out secure training centre within the meaning given by section 15 of the Criminal Justice and Public Order Act 1994, its director)The local government area in which the secure training centre is locatedThe principal of a secure collegeThe local government area in which the secure college is locatedThe manager of a secure children’s home, within the meaning given by section 102(11) of the Legal Aid, Sentencing and Punishment of Offenders Act 2012, which is used to accommodate children remanded or sentenced to custody after being charged with or convicted of an offenceThe local government area in which the secure children’s home is located
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)SCHEDULE 3 – Extraction of information from electronic devices: authorised persons Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
269
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesSCHEDULE 3	Section 44EXTRACTION OF INFORMATION FROM ELECTRONIC DEVICES: AUTHORISED PERSONSPART 1AUTHORISED PERSONS IN RELATION TO ALL PURPOSES WITHIN SECTION 37 OR 41A constable of a police force in England and Wales.A member of staff appointed by the chief officer of police of a police force in England and Wales.An employee of the Common Council of the City of London who is under the direction and control of a chief officer of police.A constable within the meaning of Part 1 of the Police and Fire Reform (Scotland) Act 2012 (asp 8) (see section 99 of that Act).A member of staff appointed by the Scottish Police Authority under section 26(1) of the Police and Fire Reform (Scotland) Act 2012.A police officer within the meaning of the Police (Northern Ireland) Act 2000 (see section 77(1) of that Act).A constable of the British Transport Police Force.An employee of the British Transport Police Authority appointed under section 27 of the Railways and Transport Safety Act 2003.A constable of the Ministry of Defence police. A National Crime Agency officer.[F10A member of the Royal Navy Police, the Royal Military Police or the Royal Air Force Police.]A person who has been engaged to provide services consisting of or including the extraction of information from electronic devices for the purposes of the exercise of functions by a person listed in this Part of this Schedule.PART 2AUTHORISED PERSONS IN RELATION TO ALL PURPOSES WITHIN SECTION 37
270	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)SCHEDULE 3 – Extraction of information from electronic devices: authorised personsDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesF11...A person appointed as an immigration officer under paragraph 1 of Schedule 2 to the Immigration Act 1971.A person who is an enforcement officer by virtue of section 15 of the Gangmasters (Licensing) Act 2004.A person who has been engaged to provide services consisting of or including the extraction of information from electronic devices for the purposes of the exercise of functions by a person listed in this Part of this Schedule.PART 3AUTHORISED PERSONS IN RELATION TO THE PREVENTION OF CRIME ETC ONLYAn officer of Revenue and Customs.A person designated as a general customs official or a customs revenue official under the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 (see sections 3 and 11 of that Act).[F12An officer of the department of the Secretary of State for Business and Trade.An officer of the department of the Secretary of State for Energy Security and Net Zero. An officer of the department of the Secretary of State for Science, Innovation and Technology.]A member of the Serious Fraud Office.A person appointed by the Financial Conduct Authority under the Financial Services and Markets Act 2000 to conduct an investigation.An officer of the Competition and Markets Authority.A person who is authorised by the Food Standards Agency to act in matters arising under or by virtue of the Food Safety Act 1990.A person who is authorised for the purposes of Part 6 of the Social Security Administration Act 1992.An inspector appointed under section 15 of the Child Support Act 1991.A person designated by the Director General of the Independent Office for Police Conduct under paragraph 19(2) of Schedule 3 to the Police Reform Act 2002.The Police Investigations and Review Commissioner.A person designated by the Police Investigations and Review Commissioner under paragraph 7B(1) of Schedule 4 to the Police, Public Order and Criminal Justice (Scotland) Act 2006 (asp 10).
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32) SCHEDULE 4 – Pre-charge bailDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
271
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesAn officer appointed by the Police Ombudsman for Northern Ireland under section 56(1) or (1A) of the Police (Northern Ireland) Act 1998.A person who is an enforcement officer by virtue of section 303 of the Gambling Act 2005. A person who has been engaged to provide services consisting of or including the extraction of information from electronic devices for the purposes of the exercise offunctions by a person listed in this Part of this Schedule.SCHEDULE 4	Section 45PRE-CHARGE BAILPART 1GRANT OF PRE-CHARGE BAILAmendments to the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 (c. 60)1 The Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 is amended as follows.2 (1) Section 30A (release of a person arrested elsewhere than at a police station) is amended as follows.(2) For subsection (1) substitute—“(1) If subsection (1A) applies, a constable may release on bail a person who is arrested or taken into custody in the circumstances mentioned in section 30(1).”(3) In subsection (1A)(b), for “a police officer of the rank of inspector or above” substitute “a custody officer”.(4) Before subsection (2) insert—“(1C) If subsection (1A) does not apply, a constable may release without bail a person who is arrested or taken into custody in the circumstances mentioned in section 30(1).”(5) In subsection (2), after “subsection (1)” insert “or (1C)”.(2) 
272	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)SCHEDULE 4 – Pre-charge bailDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes3 (1) Section 34 (limitations on police detention) is amended as follows.(2) For subsection (5) substitute—“(5) A person whose release is ordered under subsection (2) must be released on bail if subsection (5A) applies.”(3) After subsection (5A) insert—“(5AA) A person whose release is ordered under subsection (2) must be released without bail if subsection (5A) does not apply.”(4) In subsection (5B)(a), after “subsection (5)” insert “or (5AA)”.4 In section 36 (custody officers at police stations), after subsection (7B) insert—“(7C) The reference to a custody officer in section 30A(1A)(b) includes a reference to an officer other than a custody officer who is performing the functions of a custody officer by virtue of subsection (4) above.”5 (1) Section 37 (duties of custody officer before charge) is amended as follows.(2) For subsection (2) substitute—“(2) If—(a) the custody officer (“C”) determines that C does not have such evidence before C, and(b) the pre-conditions for bail are satisfied,the person arrested must be released on bail (subject to subsection (3)).”(3) After subsection (2) insert— “(2A) If—(a) the custody officer (“C”) determines that C does not have such evidence before C, and(b) the pre-conditions for bail are not satisfied,the person arrested must be released without bail (subject to subsection (3)).”(4) In subsection (6A)(a), after “subsection (2)” insert “or (2A)”.(2) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32) SCHEDULE 4 – Pre-charge bailDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
273
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(5) In subsection (7), for paragraphs (b) and (c) (including the “or” at the end of paragraph (c)) substitute—“(b)	shall be released—(i) without charge, and    (ii) if the pre-conditions for bail are satisfied, on bail, but not for the purpose mentioned in paragraph (a),(c) shall be released—(i) without charge, and(ii) if the pre-conditions for bail are not satisfied, without bail, or”.(6) In subsection (8A)(b), for “(c)” substitute “(b)”.6 (1) Section 37CA (breach of bail following release under section 37(7)(c)) is amended as follows.(2) In the section heading, for “section 37(7)(c)” substitute “section 37(7)(b)”.(3) In subsection (1), for “section 37(7)(c)” substitute “section 37(7)(b)”.(4) In subsection (2), for paragraph (b) substitute— “(b)	shall be released—(i) without charge, and(ii) if the pre-conditions for bail are satisfied, on bail, or(c) shall be released—(i) without charge, and(ii) if the pre-conditions for bail are not satisfied, without bail.”7 In section 37D(4A) (release on bail under section 37: further provision), for “section 37(7)(c)” substitute “section 37(7)(b)”.8 In section 41(7) (release following period of detention without charge), for paragraphs (a) and (b) substitute—“(a)	on bail, if the pre-conditions for bail are satisfied, or(b)	without bail, if those pre-conditions are not satisfied.”
274	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)SCHEDULE 4 – Pre-charge bailDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes9 In section 42(10) (release following continued detention without charge), for paragraphs (a) and (b) and the words following those paragraphs substitute—“(a)	on bail, if the pre-conditions for bail are satisfied, or      (b)	without bail, if those pre-conditions are not satisfied, subject to subsection (10A).”10 (1) Section 43 (warrants of further detention) is amended as follows.(2) In subsection (15), for paragraphs (a) and (b) substitute—“(a)	on bail, if the pre-conditions for bail are satisfied, or(b)	without bail, if those pre-conditions are not satisfied.”(3) In subsection (18), for paragraphs (a) and (b) substitute—“(a)	on bail, if the pre-conditions for bail are satisfied, or(b)	without bail, if those pre-conditions are not satisfied.”11 In section 44(7) (release following extension of warrants of further detention), for paragraphs (a) and (b) substitute—“(a)	on bail, if the pre-conditions for bail are satisfied, or(b) without bail, if those pre-conditions are not satisfied.”12 (1) Section 47ZC (applicable bail period: conditions A to D) is amended as follows.(2) In subsection (3)(a), for “section 37(7)(c)” substitute “section 37(7)(b)”.(3) In subsection (4)(a), for “section 37(7)(c)” substitute “section 37(7)(b)”.
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32) SCHEDULE 4 – Pre-charge bailDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
275
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes13 In section 50A (interpretation of references to pre-conditions for bail), for paragraph (b) substitute—“(b)	that the custody officer has considered any representations made by the person or the person’s legal representative.”Amendments to the Criminal Justice Act 2003 (c. 44)14 The Criminal Justice Act 2003 is amended as follows.
276	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)SCHEDULE 4 – Pre-charge bailDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes15 (1) Section 24A (arrest for failure to comply with conditions attached to conditional caution) is amended as follows.(2) In subsection (2), for paragraphs (b) and (c) substitute— “(b)  released without charge and on bail if—(i) the release is to enable a decision to be made as to whether the person should be charged with the offence, and(ii) the pre-conditions for bail are satisfied, or(c) released without charge and without bail (with or without any variation in the conditions attached to the caution) if paragraph (b) does not apply.”(3) In subsection (3)(a), for “subsection (2)(c)” substitute “subsection (2)(b)”.(4) In subsection (4), for “subsection (2)(c)” substitute “subsection (2)(b)”.6	In section 24B(5) (application of PACE provisions), for “section 24A(2)(c)” substitute “section 24A(2)(b)”.PART 2FACTORS TO BE TAKEN INTO ACCOUNT IN DECIDING WHETHER TO GRANT PRE-CHARGE BAIL17 In section 30A of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 (release of person arrested elsewhere than at police station), after subsection (1A) insert—“(1B) In determining whether releasing the person on bail is necessary and proportionate in all the circumstances, the constable must have regard in particular to—(a) the need to secure that the person surrenders to custody,(b) the need to prevent offending by the person,(a) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32) SCHEDULE 4 – Pre-charge bailDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
277
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(c) the need to safeguard victims of crime and witnesses, taking into account any vulnerabilities of any alleged victim of, or alleged witness to, the offence for which the person was arrested where these vulnerabilities have been identified by the constable,(d) the need to safeguard the person, taking into account any vulnerabilities of the person where these vulnerabilities have been identified by the constable, and(e) the need to manage risks to the public.”18 (1) Section 50A of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 (interpretation of references to pre-conditions for bail) is amended as follows.(2) The existing text becomes subsection (1).(3) After that subsection insert—“(2) In determining whether releasing the person on bail is necessary and proportionate in all the circumstances, the custody officer must have regard in particular to—(a) the need to secure that the person surrenders to custody,(b) the need to prevent offending by the person,(c) the need to safeguard victims of crime and witnesses, taking into account any vulnerabilities of any alleged victim of, or alleged witness to, the offence for which the person was arrested where these vulnerabilities have been identified by the custody officer,(d) the need to safeguard the person, taking into account any vulnerabilities of the person where these vulnerabilities have been identified by the custody officer, and(e) the need to manage risks to the public.”PART 3DUTY TO SEEK VIEWS OF ALLEGED VICTIMSAmendments to the Bail Act 1976 (c. 63)19 In section 3A of the Bail Act 1976 (conditions of bail in case of police bail), after subsection (6) insert—“(7) For further provision about the grant of bail by a custody officer under Part 4 of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 or the variation by a custody
278	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)SCHEDULE 4 – Pre-charge bailDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesofficer of the conditions of bail granted under that Part, see section 47ZZA of that Act.”Amendments to the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 (c. 60)20 The Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 is amended as follows.21 (1) Section 30CA (bail under section 30A: variation of conditions by police) is amended as follows.(2) After subsection (4) insert—“(4A) If it is reasonably practicable to do so, the investigating officer must seek the views of the alleged victim (if any) of the relevant offence on—(a) whether any of the conditions that are relevant conditions should be varied under subsection (1), and(b) if so, what variations should be made to those conditions.(4B) The investigating officer must inform the relevant officer of any views obtained under subsection (4A).(4C) If any of the conditions which are relevant conditions are varied under subsection (1), the investigating officer must, if it is reasonably practicable to do so, notify the alleged victim of the variations.(4D) If the alleged victim of the relevant offence appears to the investigating officer to be vulnerable, subsections (4A) and (4C) apply as if references to the alleged victim of the offence were to a person appearing to the officer to represent the alleged victim.”(3) For subsection (5) substitute— “(5) In this section—  “investigating officer”, in relation to the relevant offence, means the constable or other person in charge of the investigation of the offence;  “relevant condition”, in relation to the relevant offence and an alleged victim of that offence, means a condition that relates to the safeguarding of the alleged victim;  “relevant offence” means the offence for which the person making the request under subsection (1) was under arrest when granted bail under section 30A(1);  
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32) SCHEDULE 4 – Pre-charge bailDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
279
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes  “relevant officer”, in relation to a designated police station, means a custody officer but, in relation to any other police station—(a) means a constable who is not involved in the investigation of the relevant offence, if such a constable is readily available, and(b) if no such constable is readily available—(i) means a constable other than the one who granted bail to the person, if such a constable is readily available, and(ii) if no such constable is readily available, means the constable who granted bail.(6) For the purposes of this section a person (“P”) is an alleged victim of an offence if—(a) an allegation has been made to a constable or other person involved in the investigation of the offence that P has suffered physical, mental or emotional harm, or economic loss, which was directly caused by the offence, and(b) P is an individual.(7) For the purposes of this section an alleged victim of an offence is vulnerable if the alleged victim—(a) was aged under 18 at the time of the offence, or(b) may have difficulty understanding a communication from an investigating officer under this section, or communicating effectively in response to it, by reason of—(i) a physical disability or disorder,(ii) a mental disorder within the meaning of the Mental Health Act 1983, or(iii) a significant impairment of intelligence and social functioning.”22 After section 47 insert—“47ZZA Duty to seek views of alleged victims on conditions of pre-charge bail(1) Subsections (2) to (5) apply if—(a) a person has been arrested for an offence, and(b) a custody officer proposes to release the person on bail under this Part (except section 37C(2)(b) or 37CA(2)(b)).(2) If it is reasonably practicable to do so, the investigating officer must seek the views of the alleged victim (if any) of the offence on—(a) whether relevant conditions should be imposed on the person’s bail, and(b) if so, what relevant conditions should be imposed.(a) 
280	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)SCHEDULE 4 – Pre-charge bailDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(3) In this section “relevant condition”, in relation to an offence and an alleged victim of that offence, means a condition that relates to the safeguarding of the alleged victim.(4) The investigating officer must inform the custody officer of any views obtained under subsection (2).(5) If the person is granted bail subject to relevant conditions, the investigating officer must, if it is reasonably practicable to do so, notify the alleged victim of the offence of those conditions.(6) If the alleged victim of the offence appears to the investigating officer to be vulnerable, subsections (2) and (5) apply as if references to the alleged victim of the offence were to a person appearing to the officer to represent the alleged victim.(7) Subsections (8) to (11) apply if—(a) a person has been arrested for an offence,(b) the person has been released on bail under this Part subject to conditions, and(c) the person requests a custody officer to vary the conditions under section 3A(8) of the Bail Act 1976.(8) If it is reasonably practicable to do so, the investigating officer must seek the views of the alleged victim (if any) of the offence on—(a) whether any of the conditions that are relevant conditions should be varied, and(b) if so, what variations should be made to those conditions.(9) The investigating officer must inform the custody officer of any views obtained under subsection (8).(10) If any of the conditions which are relevant conditions are varied, the investigating officer must, if it is reasonably practicable to do so, notify the alleged victim of the variations.(11) If the alleged victim of the offence appears to the investigating officer to be vulnerable, subsections (8) and (10) apply as if references to the alleged victim of the offence were to a person appearing to the officer to represent the alleged victim.(12) In this section “investigating officer”, in relation to an offence, means the constable or other person in charge of the investigation of the offence.(13) For the purposes of this section a person (“P”) is an alleged victim of an offence if—(a) an allegation has been made to a constable or other person involved in the investigation of the offence that P has suffered physical, mental or emotional harm, or economic loss, which was directly caused by the offence, and(b) P is an individual.(14) For the purposes of this section an alleged victim of an offence is vulnerable if the alleged victim—(2) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32) SCHEDULE 4 – Pre-charge bailDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
281
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(a) was aged under 18 at the time of the offence, or(b) may have difficulty understanding a communication from an investigating officer under this section, or communicating effectively in response to it, by reason of—(i) a physical disability or disorder,(ii) a mental disorder within the meaning of the Mental Health Act 1983, or(iii) a significant impairment of intelligence and social functioning.”Amendments to the Criminal Justice Act 2003 (c. 44)23 In section 24B(3) of the Criminal Justice Act 2003 (arrest for failure to comply with conditions of conditional caution: application of PACE provisions)—(a) before paragraph (a) insert—“(za)  in section 30CA, omit subsections (4A) to (4D)”, and(b) in paragraph (a), for the words from “in section 30CA(5)(a)” to “provision” substitute “in section 30CA(5), in paragraph (a) of the definition of “relevant officer”, for the reference to being involved in the investigation of the relevant offence”.PART 4LIMITS ON PERIOD OF BAIL WITHOUT CHARGE24 The Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 is amended as follows.17 
282	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)SCHEDULE 4 – Pre-charge bailDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes25 In section 30B(8) (notice of release under section 30A: bail end date), for “28 days” substitute “3 months”.26 (1) Section 47ZB (applicable bail period: initial limit) is amended as follows.(2) In subsection (1)—(a) in paragraph (a)—(i) for “SFO case” substitute “FCA case, HMRC case, NCA case or SFO case”, and(ii) for “3 months” substitute “6 months”, and(b) in paragraph (b)—(i) for “in an FCA case or any other case” substitute “in any other case”, and(ii) for “28 days” substitute “3 months”.(3) In subsection (4)—(a) in paragraph (b)(ii), for “a senior officer” substitute “a member of staff of that Authority who is of the description designated for the purposes of this sub-paragraph by the Chief Executive of that Authority”,(b) after paragraph (b) insert—“(ba)  an “HMRC case” is a case in which—(i) the relevant offence in relation to the person is being investigated by an officer of Revenue and Customs, and(ii) an officer of Revenue and Customs confirms that sub-paragraph (i) applies,(bb)  an “NCA case” is a case in which—(i) the relevant offence in relation to the person is being investigated by the National Crime Agency, and(ii) a National Crime Agency officer confirms that sub- paragraph (i) applies,”,(c) in paragraph (c)(ii), for “a senior officer” substitute “a member of the Serious Fraud Office”, and(d) omit paragraph (d) and the “and” preceding that paragraph.
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32) SCHEDULE 4 – Pre-charge bailDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
283
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes27 In section 47ZC (applicable bail period: conditions A to D in sections 47ZD to 47ZG), in subsection (6)—(a) in paragraph (a), for “senior officer” substitute “relevant officer”,(b) after paragraph (a) insert—“(aa) in relation to a condition which falls to be considered by virtue of section 47ZDA, the senior officer in question;(ab) in relation to a condition which falls to be considered by virtue of section 47ZDB, the appropriate decision-maker in question,”, and(c) in paragraph (b), for “appropriate decision-maker” substitute “qualifying police officer”.28 (1) Section 47ZD (applicable bail period: extension of initial limit in standard cases) is amended as follows.(2) In subsection (1)(c), for “senior officer” substitute “relevant officer”.(3) In subsection (2)—(a) for “senior officer” substitute “relevant officer”, and(b) for “3 months” substitute “6 months”.(4) In subsections (3) to (5), for “senior officer” substitute “relevant officer”.(5) After subsection (5) insert—“(6) For the purposes of this Part “relevant officer” means a police officer of the rank of inspector or above.”29 After section 47ZD insert—“47ZDA Applicable bail period: further extension of limit in standard cases(1) This section applies in relation to a person if—(a) a relevant officer has authorised an extension of the applicable bail period in relation to the person under section 47ZD,(b) that period has not ended, and(c) a senior officer is satisfied that conditions A to D are met in relation to the person.(2) The senior officer may authorise the applicable bail period in relation to the person to be extended so that it ends at the end of the period of 9 months beginning with the person’s bail start date.(1) 
284	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)SCHEDULE 4 – Pre-charge bailDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(3) Before determining whether to give an authorisation under subsection (2) in relation to a person, the senior officer must arrange for the person or the person’s legal representative to be informed that a determination is to be made.(4) In determining whether to give an authorisation under subsection (2) in relation to a person, the senior officer must consider any representations made by the person or the person’s legal representative.(5) The senior officer must arrange for the person or the person’s legal representative to be informed whether an authorisation under subsection (2) has been given in relation to the person.(6) For the purposes of this Part “senior officer” means a police officer of the rank of superintendent or above.47ZDB Applicable bail period: extension of limit in non-standard cases(1) This section applies in relation to a person if—(a) the applicable bail period in relation to a person is the period mentioned in section 47ZB(1)(a),(b) that period has not ended, and(c) an appropriate decision-maker is satisfied that conditions A to D are met in relation to the person.(2) The appropriate decision-maker may authorise the applicable bail period in relation to the person to be extended so that it ends at the end of the period of 12 months beginning with the person’s bail start date.(3) Before determining whether to give an authorisation under subsection (2) in relation to a person, the appropriate decision-maker must arrange for the person or the person’s legal representative to be informed that a determination is to be made.(4) In determining whether to give an authorisation under subsection (2) in relation to a person, the appropriate decision-maker must consider any representations made by the person or the person’s legal representative.(5) The appropriate decision-maker must arrange for the person or the person’s legal representative to be informed whether an authorisation under subsection (2) has been given in relation to the person.(6) For the purposes of this Part “appropriate decision-maker” means—(a) in an FCA case, a member of staff of the Financial Conduct Authority who is of the description designated for the purposes of this section by the Chief Executive of that Authority,(b) in an HMRC case, an officer of Revenue and Customs of a grade that is equivalent to the rank of superintendent or above,(c) in an NCA case, a National Crime Agency officer of a grade that is equivalent to the rank of superintendent or above, and(d) in an SFO case, a member of the Serious Fraud Office who is of the Senior Civil Service.”(a) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32) SCHEDULE 4 – Pre-charge bailDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
285
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes30 (1) Section 47ZE (applicable bail period: extension of limit in designated cases) is amended as follows.(2) In subsection (1), for paragraphs (a) and (b) substitute “a senior officer has authorised an extension of the applicable bail period in relation to the person under section 47ZDA.”(3) In subsection (2), for “A qualifying prosecutor” substitute “The Director of Public Prosecutions”.(4) In subsection (3)—(a) for “an appropriate decision-maker” substitute “a qualifying police officer”,(b) for “the decision maker” substitute “the officer”, and(c) for “6 months” substitute “12 months”.(5) Omit subsection (4).(6) In subsection (5)—(a) in paragraph (a), for “appropriate decision-maker” substitute “qualifying police officer”, and(b) for paragraph (b) substitute—“(b)	the qualifying police officer must consult the Director of Public Prosecutions.”(7) In subsections (6) and (7), for “appropriate decision-maker” substitute “qualifying police officer”.(8) In subsection (9) omit the definition of “qualifying prosecutor” and the “and” immediately before that definition.31 (1) Section 47ZF (applicable bail period: first extension of limit by court) is amended as follows.(2) In subsection (1)—(a) omit paragraph (a),(b) in paragraph (b), for “section 47ZD” substitute “section 47ZDA”,(c) after paragraph (b) (but before the “or” at the end of that paragraph) insert— “(ba)	an appropriate decision-maker has authorised an extension of the applicable bail period in relation to the person undersection 47ZDB,”, and(d) in paragraph (c), for “an appropriate decision-maker” substitute “a qualifying police officer”.(a) 
286	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)SCHEDULE 4 – Pre-charge bailDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(3) In subsection (4)—(a) in paragraph (a)—(i) for “subsection (1)(a) or (b)” substitute “subsection (1)(b)”, and(ii) for “6 months” substitute “12 months”, and(b) in paragraph (b)—(i) for “subsection (1)(c)” substitute “subsection (1)(ba) or (c)”, and(ii) for “9 months” substitute “18 months”.(4) In subsection (6)—(a) in paragraph (a)—(i) for “subsection (1)(a) or (b)” substitute “subsection (1)(b)”, and(ii) for “9 months” substitute “18 months”, and(b) in paragraph (b)—(i) for “subsection (1)(c)” substitute “subsection (1)(ba) or (c)”, and(ii) for “12 months” substitute “24 months”.(5) In subsection (8), after paragraph (b) insert—“(ba)	an officer of Revenue and Customs, (bb)	a National Crime Agency officer,”.32 In section 47ZI (sections 47ZF to 47ZH: proceedings in magistrates’ court), in each of subsections (2)(a) and (3)(a), for “12 months” substitute “24 months”.33 In section 47ZM(2) (applicable bail period: special case of release on bail under section 30A), for “28 days”, in both places, substitute “3 months”.PART 5POLICE DETENTION AFTER ARREST FOR BREACH OF PRE-CHARGE BAIL ETC34 The Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 is amended as follows.17 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32) SCHEDULE 4 – Pre-charge bailDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
287
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes35 In section 41 (limits on period of detention without charge), after subsection (12) insert—“(13) Section 47(6) and (6A) makes further provision about the calculation of a period of police detention for the purposes of this Part.”36 In section 47 (bail after arrest), after subsection (6) insert—“(6A) Where a person has been arrested under section 46A above (other than in a case within subsection (1ZA) or (1ZB) of that section) the period of 3 hours beginning with the time at which the person arrives at a police station following the arrest is not to be included as part of any period of police detention which falls to be calculated in relation to the person under this Part of this Act.”PART 6GUIDANCE ON PRE-CHARGE BAIL37 In the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984, after section 50A insert—“50B Guidance from the College of Policing on pre-charge bail(1) The College of Policing may, with the approval of the Secretary of State, issue guidance on bail that is granted to a person under Part 3 or this Part (“pre-charge bail”).(2) Guidance on pre-charge bail may in particular cover—(a) the exercise of powers to release a person on pre-charge bail;(b) the exercise of powers to impose or vary conditions of pre-charge bail;(c) the exercise of powers to arrest a person—(i) for failing to answer pre-charge bail, or(ii) for breaching any conditions of pre-charge bail;(d) the exercise of powers to extend the period of pre-charge bail;(a) 
288	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)SCHEDULE 4 – Pre-charge bailDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(e) the duty to seek the views of alleged victims about conditions of pre- charge bail.(3) The College of Policing may, with the approval of the Secretary of State, from time to time revise the whole or any part of its guidance on pre-charge bail.(4) Before issuing or revising guidance on pre-charge bail, the College of Policing must consult—(a) the National Police Chiefs’ Council,(b) such persons as appear to the College to represent the views of local policing bodies, and(c) such other persons as the College thinks fit.(5) The Secretary of State must lay before Parliament any guidance on pre- charge bail issued by the College of Policing, and any revision of such guidance.(6) The Secretary of State is not required by subsection (5) to lay before Parliament, or may exclude from what is laid, anything the publication of which, in the opinion of the Secretary of State—(a) could prejudice the prevention or detection of crime or the apprehension or prosecution of offenders, or(b) could jeopardise the safety of any person.(7) A person who exercises functions relating to pre-charge bail must have regard to the guidance.(8) But subsection (7) does not apply to—(a) a member of the Serious Fraud Office,(b) a member of staff of the Financial Conduct Authority,(c) an officer of Revenue and Customs, or(d) a National Crime Agency officer.(9) A failure on the part of a person to whom subsection (7) applies to comply with the guidance does not of itself render the person liable to any criminal or civil proceedings.(10) But guidance on pre-charge bail is admissible in evidence in criminal or civil proceedings and a court may take into account a failure to comply with it in determining a question in the proceedings.”
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32) SCHEDULE 5 – Overseas production orders Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
289
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesSCHEDULE 5	Section 51OVERSEAS PRODUCTION ORDERS1 The Crime (Overseas Production Orders) Act 2019 is amended as follows.2 (1) Section 3 (meaning of “electronic data” and “excepted electronic data”) is amended as follows.(2) In subsection (4), at the end insert “, other than communications data to which subsection (4A) applies”.(3) After subsection (4) insert—“(4A) This subsection applies to communications data which is comprised in, included as part of, attached to or logically associated with electronic data which, apart from this subsection, may be specified or described in the application for the overseas production order.”3 In section 5(3) (content of order: requirements fulfilled by reference to part only of data sought) for “4(5) or (7)” substitute “4(5), (6) or (7)”.4 (1) Section 9 (restrictions on service of order) is amended as follows.(2) In subsection (2), after “the Secretary of State” insert “or a prescribed person”.(3) In subsection (3), after “the Lord Advocate” insert “or a prescribed person”.(4) In subsection (4)—(a) for “The Secretary of State or, as the case may be, the Lord Advocate” substitute “A person”, and(b) for “the Secretary of State or the Lord Advocate” substitute “that person”.(5) After subsection (4) insert—“(5) In this section “prescribed person”—(a) in relation to an overseas production order made in England and Wales or Northern Ireland, means a person prescribed by regulations made by the Secretary of State;(b) in relation to an overseas production order made in Scotland, means a person prescribed by regulations made by the Lord Advocate.”(a) 
290	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)SCHEDULE 5 – Overseas production ordersDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes5 (1) Section 14 (means of service) is amended as follows.(2) In subsection (3)(d)—(a) in sub-paragraph (i), after “the Secretary of State” insert “or a prescribed person”, and(b) in sub-paragraph (ii), after “the Lord Advocate” insert “or a prescribed person”.(3) After subsection (5) insert—“(6) In this section “prescribed person”—(a) in relation to an order, notice or other document made or issued in England and Wales or Northern Ireland, means a person prescribed by regulations made by the Secretary of State;(b) in relation to an order, notice or other document made or issued in Scotland, means a person prescribed by regulations made by the Lord Advocate.”6 In section 15(3) (modifications of section 9 in the case of an order made on application by the service police)—(a) in paragraph (g)—(i) omit the “and” at the end of sub-paragraph (i), and(ii) at the end of sub-paragraph (ii) insert “, and(iii) subsection (5) defined “prescribed person” as a person prescribed by regulations made by the Secretary of State;”, and(b) for paragraph (h) substitute—“(h)  section 14 is to be read as if—(i) the reference in subsection (1)(c) to a court in England and Wales, Scotland or Northern Ireland included the Court Martial,(ii) subsection (3)(d) referred only to arrangements made by the Secretary of State or a prescribed person, and(iii) subsection (6) defined “prescribed person” as a person prescribed by regulations made by the Secretary of State.”
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)SCHEDULE 6 – Special procedure for access to material relating to human remains Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
291
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes7 (1) Section 17 (regulations) is amended as follows.(2) In subsection (2), for “or 4(1)(b)” substitute “, 4(1)(b), 9(5) or 14(6)”.(3) After subsection (5) insert—“(6) Regulations made by the Lord Advocate under section 9(5) or 14(6) are subject to the negative procedure (see section 28 of the Interpretation and Legislative Reform (Scotland) Act 2010 (asp 10)).”SCHEDULE 6	Section 56SPECIAL PROCEDURE FOR ACCESS TO MATERIAL RELATING TO HUMAN REMAINSMaking of orders by judge1 (1) On an application made by a constable, a judge may make an order under paragraph 2 if the judge is satisfied that the following conditions are met.(2) The first condition is that there are reasonable grounds for believing that material that consists of, or may relate to the location of, relevant human remains—(a) is in the possession or control of a person specified in the application, or(b) is on premises occupied or controlled by a person specified in the application.(3) The second condition is that there are reasonable grounds for believing that the material consists of or includes excluded material or special procedure material.(4) The third condition is that there are reasonable grounds for believing that the material does not consist of or include items subject to legal privilege.(5) The fourth condition is that other methods of obtaining the material—(a) have been tried without success, or(b) have not been tried because it appeared that they were bound to fail.(6) The fifth condition is that it is in the public interest, having regard—(a) to the need to ensure that human remains are located and disposed of in a lawful manner, and(b) to the circumstances under which the person in possession of the material holds it,that the material should be produced or access to it should be given.
292	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)SCHEDULE 6 – Special procedure for access to material relating to human remainsDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes2 (1) An order under this paragraph is an order that, before the end of the relevant period, the person specified in the application must—(a) produce the material to a constable for the constable to take it away, or(b) give a constable access to it.(2) In sub-paragraph (1) “the relevant period” means 7 days from the date of the order or such longer period as the order may specify.3 Where the material consists of information stored in any electronic form—(a) an order under paragraph 2(1)(a) has effect as an order to produce the material in a form in which it can be taken away and in which it is visible and legible or from which it can readily be produced in a visible or legible form, and(b) an order under paragraph 2(1)(b) has effect as an order to give a constable access to the material in a form in which it is visible and legible.4 For the purposes of sections 21 and 22 of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984, material produced in pursuance of an order under paragraph 2(1)(a) is to be treated as if it were material seized by a constable.Notices of applications for orders5 (1) An application for an order under paragraph 2 that relates to material that consists of or includes journalistic material is to be made inter partes.1 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)SCHEDULE 6 – Special procedure for access to material relating to human remains Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
293
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(2) Notice of an application for an order under paragraph 2 that relates to such material may be served on a person—(a) by delivering it to the person,(b) by leaving it at the person’s proper address, or(c) by sending it by post to the person in a registered letter or by a recorded delivery service.(3) Notice of an application for an order under paragraph 2 that relates to such material may be served—(a) on a body corporate, by serving it on the body’s secretary or clerk or other similar officer;(b) on a partnership, by serving it on one of the partners.(4) For the purposes of sub-paragraph (2), and of section 7 of the Interpretation Act 1978 in its application to that sub-paragraph, the proper address of a person—(a) in the case of a secretary or clerk or other similar officer of a body corporate, is that of the registered or principal office of that body;(b) in the case of a partner of a firm is that of the principal office of the firm;(c) in any other case is the last known address of the person to be served.6 (1) Where notice of an application for an order under paragraph 2 has been served on a person, the person must not conceal, destroy, alter or dispose of the material to which the application relates until sub-paragraph (2) applies except—(a) with the leave of a judge, or(b) with the written permission of a constable.(2) This paragraph applies when—(a) the application is dismissed or abandoned, or(b) the person has complied with an order under paragraph 2 made on the application.
294	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)SCHEDULE 6 – Special procedure for access to material relating to human remainsDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesFailure to comply with order7 (1) If a person fails to comply with an order under paragraph 2, a judge may deal with the person as if the person had committed a contempt of the Crown Court.(2) Any enactment relating to contempt of the Crown Court has effect in relation to such a failure as if it were such a contempt.Issue of warrants by judge8 (1) On an application made by a constable, a judge may issue a warrant authorising a constable to enter and search premises if the judge is satisfied that the conditions in this paragraph are met.(2) The first condition is that there are reasonable grounds for believing that there is material on the premises mentioned in sub-paragraph (5) below that consists of, or may relate to the location of, relevant human remains.(3) The second condition is that each of the conditions set out in paragraph 1(3) to (6) is met in relation to the material.(4) The third condition is that there are reasonable grounds for believing, in relation to each set of premises specified in the application—(a) that it is not practicable to communicate with any person entitled to grant entry to the premises,(b) that it is practicable to communicate with a person entitled to grant entry to the premises but it is not practicable to communicate with any person entitled to grant access to the material,(c) that the material on the premises contains information which—(i) is subject to a restriction on disclosure or an obligation of secrecy contained in any enactment, including an enactment contained in an Act passed after this Act, and(ii) is likely to be disclosed in breach of it if a warrant is not issued, or(d) that service of notice of an application for an order under paragraph 2 may seriously prejudice the purpose of the search.(5) The premises referred to in sub-paragraph (2) are—(a) one or more sets of premises specified in the application (in which case the application is for a “specific premises warrant”), or(b) any premises occupied or controlled by a person specified in the application, including such sets of premises as are so specified (in which case the application is for an “all premises warrant”).
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)SCHEDULE 6 – Special procedure for access to material relating to human remains Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
295
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes9 If the application is for an all premises warrant, the judge must also be satisfied—(a) that there are reasonable grounds for believing that it is necessary to search premises occupied or controlled by the person in question which are not specified in the application, as well as those which are, in order to find the material in question, and(b) that it is not reasonably practicable to specify in the application all the premises which the person occupies or controls and which might need to be searched.10 (1) The warrant may authorise entry to and search of premises on more than one occasion if, on the application, the judge is satisfied that it is necessary to authorise multiple entries in order to achieve the purpose for which the judge issues the warrant.(2) If the warrant authorises multiple entries, the number of entries authorised may be unlimited, or limited to a maximum.11 A constable may—(a) seize and retain anything for which a search has been authorised under paragraph 8, and(b) if necessary, use reasonable force in the exercise of a power conferred by a warrant issued under that paragraph.
296	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)SCHEDULE 7 – Expedited public spaces protection ordersDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesProcedural rules12 Criminal Procedure Rules may make provision about proceedings under this Schedule, other than proceedings for an order under paragraph 2 that relates to material that consists of or includes journalistic material.Costs13 The costs of any application under this Schedule and of anything done or to be done in pursuance of an order made under it shall be in the discretion of the judge.Interpretation14 In this Schedule—  “journalistic material” has the same meaning as in the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 (see section 13 of that Act);  “judge” means a Circuit judge, a qualifying judge advocate (within the meaning of the Senior Courts Act 1981) or a District Judge (Magistrates’ Courts).SCHEDULE 7	Section 82EXPEDITED PUBLIC SPACES PROTECTION ORDERS1 The Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is amended as follows.2 In the heading of Chapter 2 of Part 4, at the end insert “and expedited orders”.1 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32) SCHEDULE 7 – Expedited public spaces protection orders Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
297
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes3 In the italic heading before section 59, at the end insert “and expedited orders”.4 In the heading of section 59 (power to make orders), before “orders” insert “public spaces protection”.5 In the heading of section 60 (duration of orders), after “of” insert “public spaces protection”.6 (1) Section 61 (variation and discharge of orders) is amended as follows.(2) In subsection (1), in the words before paragraph (a), after “protection order” insert “or expedited order”.(3) In subsection (2), for “make a variation under subsection (1)(a)” substitute “under subsection (1)(a) make a variation to a public spaces protection order”.(4) After subsection (2) insert—“(2A) A local authority may under subsection (1)(a) make a variation to an expedited order that results in the order applying to an area to which it did not previously apply only if the conditions in section 59A(2) to (4) are met as regards that area.”(5) In subsection (3), after “59(5)” insert “or 59A(6) (as the case may be)”.(6) In subsection (4), after “order” insert “or expedited order”.
298	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)SCHEDULE 7 – Expedited public spaces protection ordersDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes7 (1) Section 62 (premises etc to which alcohol prohibition does not apply) is amended as follows.(2) In subsection (1), in the words before paragraph (a), after “order” insert “or expedited order”.(3) In subsection (2), in the words before paragraph (a), after “order” insert “or an expedited order”.8 In section 63 (consumption of alcohol in breach of prohibition order), in subsection (1)—(a) in paragraph (a), after “order” insert “or an expedited order”;(b) in the words after paragraph (b) omit “public spaces protection”.9 (1) Section 64 (orders restricting public right of way over highway) is amended as follows.(2) In subsection (1), in the words before paragraph (a), after “order” insert “or expedited order”.(3) After subsection (1) insert—“(1A) Before making a public spaces protection order that restricts the public right of way over a highway, a local authority must take the prior consultation steps (see subsection (2)).(1B) A local authority may not make an expedited order that restricts the public right of way over a highway unless it—(a) takes the prior consultation steps before making the order, or(b) takes the subsequent consultation steps (see subsection (2A)) as soon as reasonably practicable after making the order.”(4) In subsection (2), for the words from “Before” to “must” substitute “To take the “prior consultation steps” in relation to an order means to”.(5) After subsection (2) insert—“(2A) To take the “subsequent consultation steps” in relation to an expedited order means to—(a) notify potentially affected persons of the order,(b) invite those persons to make representations within a specified period about the terms and effects of the order,(c) inform those persons how they can see a copy of the order, and(d) consider any representations made.(a) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32) SCHEDULE 7 – Expedited public spaces protection orders Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
299
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesThe definition of “potentially affected persons” in subsection (2) applies to this subsection as if the reference there to “the proposed order” were to “the order”.”(6) After subsection (3) insert—“(3B) Where a local authority proposes to make an expedited order restricting the public right of way over a highway that is also within the area of another local authority it must, if it thinks appropriate to do so, consult that other authority before, or as soon as reasonably practicable after, making the order.”(7) In subsections (4), (5), (6), (7) and (8), after “order” insert “or expedited order”.10 In section 65 (categories of highway over which public right of way may not be restricted), in subsection (1), in the words before paragraph (a), after “order” insert “or an expedited order”.11 (1) Section 66 (challenging validity of orders) is amended as follows.(2) In subsections (1) and (6), after “public spaces protection order”, in each place it occurs, insert “or an expedited order”.(3) In subsection (7), in the words before paragraph (a)—(a) after “order”, in the first place it occurs, insert “or an expedited order”;(b) for “a public spaces protection”, in the second place it occurs, substitute “such an”.12 (1) Section 67 (offence of failing to comply with order) is amended as follows.(2) In subsections (1) and (4), after “order”, in each place it occurs, insert “or an expedited order”.(3) In subsection (3), after “order” insert “or expedited order”.
300	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)SCHEDULE 7 – Expedited public spaces protection ordersDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes13 (1) Section 68 (fixed penalty notices) is amended as follows.(2) In subsection (1), at the end insert “or an expedited order”.(3) In subsection (3), at the end insert “or expedited order”.14 In section 70 (byelaws), after “protection order” insert “or an expedited order”.15 (1) Section 71 (bodies other than local authorities with statutory functions in relation to land) is amended as follows.(2) In subsections (3) to (5), after “public spaces protection order”, in each place it occurs, insert “or an expedited order”.(3) In subsection (6)—(a) in paragraph (a), after “order” insert “or expedited order”;(b) in paragraph (b)(i), after “order” insert “, or an expedited order,”.16 In the heading of section 72 (Convention rights, consultation, publicity and notification), at the beginning insert “Public spaces protection orders:”17 (1) Section 74 (interpretation of Chapter 2 of Part 4) is amended as follows.(2) In subsection (1)—(a) at the appropriate places insert—““16 to 19 Academy” has the meaning given by section 1B of the Academies Act 2010;”;““expedited order” has the meaning given by section 59A(1);”; ““Local Health Board” means a Local Health Board established under section 11 of the National Health Service (Wales) Act 2006;”;
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)SCHEDULE 8 – Road traffic offences: minor and consequential amendments Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
301
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes““NHS body” has the meaning given in section 275 of the National Health Service Act 2006;”;““school” has the meaning given by section 4 of the Education Act 1996.”;(b) for the definition of “restricted area” substitute— ““restricted area”—(a) in relation to a public spaces protection order, has the meaning given by section 59(4);(b) in relation to an expedited order, has the meaning given by section 59A(5).”(3) After subsection (2) insert—“(3) For the purposes of this Chapter, an expedited order “regulates” an activity if the activity is—(a) prohibited by virtue of section 59A(5)(a), or  (b) subjected to requirements by virtue of section 59A(5)(b), whether or not for all persons and at all times.”SCHEDULE 8	Section 88ROAD TRAFFIC OFFENCES: MINOR AND CONSEQUENTIAL AMENDMENTSRoad Traffic Act 1988 (c. 52)1 (1) The Road Traffic Act 1988 is amended as follows.(2) In section 12E (effect of motor race order), in the table in subsection (3)—(a) after the entry relating to section 2B of the Road Traffic Act 1988 (causing death by careless, or inconsiderate, driving), insert—
“Section 2C
Causing serious injury by careless, or inconsiderate, driving”
(b) in the entry relating to section 3ZB (causing death by driving: unlicensed, disqualified or uninsured drivers), in the second column omit “, disqualified”, and(c) after the entry relating to section 3ZB insert—
“Section 3ZC Section 3ZD
Causing death by driving: disqualified driversCausing serious injury by driving: disqualified drivers”
302	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)SCHEDULE 8 – Road traffic offences: minor and consequential amendmentsDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(3) In section 12H (races and trials of speed in Scotland: further provision), in subsection (3), after “2B” insert “, 2C”.(4) In section 13A(1) (disapplication of sections 1 to 3 for authorised motoring events), after “2B” insert “, 2C”.Road Traffic Offenders Act 1988 (c. 55)2 (1) The Road Traffic Offenders Act 1988 is amended as follows.(2) In section 24 (alternative verdicts: general), in subsection (1), in the table—(a) in the entry relating to section 1A of the Road Traffic Act 1988 (causing serious injury by dangerous driving), in the second column, after “Section 2 (dangerous driving)” insert “Section 2C (causing serious injury by careless, or inconsiderate, driving)”, and(b) after the entry relating to section 2B of that Act (causing death by careless, or inconsiderate, driving), insert—“Section 2C (causing serious injury by Section 3 (careless, and inconsiderate, careless, or inconsiderate, driving)	driving”(3) In Schedule 1 (offences to which sections 1, 6, 11 and 12(1) apply), in the table after paragraph 4, after the entry relating to section 2B of the Road Traffic Act 1988 (causing death by careless, or inconsiderate, driving) insert—
“RTA section 2C
Causing serious injury by careless, or inconsiderate, driving
Sections 11 and 12(1) of this Act”
Crime (International Co-operation) Act 2003 (c. 32)3 In paragraph 3 of Schedule 3 to the Crime (International Co-operation) Act 2003 (application of duty to give notice of driving disqualification to Republic of Ireland), after sub-paragraph (ba) insert—“(bb) section 2C (causing serious injury by careless, or inconsiderate, driving),”.
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)SCHEDULE 9 – Surrender of licences and test certificates by new drivers Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
303
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesArmed Forces Act 2006 (c. 52)4 In paragraph 12(aj) of Schedule 2 to the Armed Forces Act 2006 (road traffic offences in relation to which duty to notify service police of possible corresponding service offence arises)—(a) after “1A,” insert “2C,”, and(b) after “injury by dangerous driving,” insert “causing serious injury by careless, or inconsiderate, driving,”.SCHEDULE 9	Section 95SURRENDER OF LICENCES AND TEST CERTIFICATES BY NEW DRIVERS1 The Road Traffic (New Drivers) Act 1995 is amended as follows.2 (1) Section 2 (surrender of licences) is amended as follows.(2) For the heading substitute “Persons to whom section 3(1) applies”.(3) Before subsection (1), insert—“(A1) Section 3(1) (revocation of licences) applies to a person who—(a) is the holder of a licence, and(b) satisfies the conditions in subsection (1) or (3).”(4) In subsection (1)—(a) for “Subsection (2) applies where—” substitute “A person satisfies the conditions in this subsection if—”;(b) omit paragraph (a);(c) in paragraph (b), for “he” substitute “the person”;(d) after paragraph (d), insert—“(da)  the Secretary of State is required under section 44A(2) of that Act to endorse the person’s driving record with particulars of the offence and the penalty points to be attributed to it;”;(e) in paragraph (e)—(i) after “person’s” insert “driving record or”;(ii) omit “, or that date has been shown by other evidence in the proceedings”;(f) in paragraph (f), for “court” substitute “Secretary of State”.(a) 
304	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)SCHEDULE 9 – Surrender of licences and test certificates by new driversDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(5) Omit subsection (2).(6) In subsection (3)—(a) for “Subsection (4) applies where—” substitute “A person satisfies the conditions in this subsection if—”;(b) for paragraph (a), substitute—“(a) the person has been given a fixed penalty notice under section 54 of the Road Traffic Offenders Act 1988 or a conditional offer has been issued to the person under section 75 of that Act;”;(c) for paragraph (c), substitute—“(c) the Secretary of State is required under section 57A(5) or 77A(2) of that Act to endorse the person’s driving record with particulars of the offence and the penalty points to be attributed to it;”;(d) in paragraph (d), for “appropriate person” substitute “Secretary of State”;(e) in paragraph (e), after the first “the” insert “person’s driving record or”;(f) in paragraph (f), for “appropriate person” substitute “Secretary of State”.(7) Omit subsection (4).(8) Omit subsection (7).3 (1) Section 3 (revocation of licences) is amended as follows.(2) For subsection (1) substitute—“(1) The Secretary of State must, in the case of a person to whom this subsection applies (see section 2), by notice served on the person revoke the person’s licence.”(3) Omit subsection (1ZA).(4) In subsection (1A)—(a) in the words before paragraph (a), omit “or (1ZA)”;(b) in paragraph (b), at the beginning insert “if the Secretary of State is already in receipt of it,”.(5) In subsection (1B), omit “or (1ZA)”.4 After section 3 insert—1 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)SCHEDULE 9 – Surrender of licences and test certificates by new drivers Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
305
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes“3A Surrender of licences(1) Where—(a) the Secretary of State is required under section 3(1) or (1B) to serve a notice on a person revoking the person’s licence, and(b) the Secretary of State is not already in receipt of the licence,the notice may also require the person to surrender the licence to the Secretary of State before the end of the period of 28 days beginning with the date on which the notice is served.(2) A person who, without reasonable excuse, fails to comply with a requirement imposed under subsection (1)—(a) is guilty of an offence, and(b) is liable on summary conviction to a fine not exceeding level 3 on the standard scale.(3) Where the Secretary of State receives a Northern Ireland licence pursuant to a requirement to surrender it imposed under subsection (1), the Secretary of State must send it to the licensing authority in Northern Ireland.”5 In section 9, for subsection (5) (interpretation: address for sending licences, test certificates etc) substitute—“(5) Any requirement under any provision of this Act that—(a) a licence, a test certificate or a notice must be sent to the Secretary of State, or(b) a licence or a test certificate must be surrendered to the Secretary of State,is a requirement that the licence, test certificate or notice must be sent, or the licence or test certificate must be surrendered, to the Secretary of State at such address as the Secretary of State may determine.”6 (1) Schedule 1 (newly qualified drivers holding test certificates) is amended as follows.(2) Omit—(a) paragraph 1(2A);(b) paragraph 2(1);(c) paragraph 3 and the heading before it;(d) paragraph 4 and the italic heading before it.(a) 
306	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)SCHEDULE 9 – Surrender of licences and test certificates by new driversDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(a) for sub-paragraph (1) substitute— “(1) Where—(a) there is a person to whom this Part of this Schedule applies,(b) the person satisfies the conditions in section 2(1)(b) to (da) and (f) or (3)(a) to (d) and (f),(c) the Secretary of State is satisfied that the person has been issued with a test certificate, and(d) the person’s driving record, licence or test certificate shows the date on which the person became a qualified driver,the Secretary of State must by notice served on the person revoke the person’s test certificate and this sub-paragraph applies to the person instead of section 3(1).”;(b) omit sub-paragraph (1ZA);(c) in sub-paragraph (1A)—(i) omit “or (1ZA)”;(ii) after “with” insert “, if the Secretary of State is already in receipt of it,”;(d) in sub-paragraph (1B), omit “or (1ZA)”.(4) After paragraph 5 insert—“Surrender of test certificate5A   (1) Where—(a) the Secretary of State is required under paragraph 5(1) or (1B) to serve a notice on a person revoking the person’s test certificate, and(b) the Secretary of State is not already in receipt of the test certificate,the notice may also require the person to surrender the test certificate to the Secretary of State before the end of the period of 28 days beginning with the date on which the notice is served.(2) A person who, without reasonable excuse, fails to comply with a requirement imposed under sub-paragraph (1)—(a) is guilty of an offence, and(b) is liable on summary conviction to a fine not exceeding level 3 on the standard scale.(3) Where the Secretary of State receives a Northern Ireland test certificate pursuant to a requirement to surrender it imposed under sub-paragraph (1), the Secretary of State must send it to the licensing authority in Northern Ireland.”(5) In paragraph 6(1), omit “or (1ZA)”.(6) Omit paragraph 7 and the italic heading before it.(4) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)SCHEDULE 9 – Surrender of licences and test certificates by new drivers Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
307
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(a) for sub-paragraph (1) substitute— “(1) Where—(a) there is a person to whom this Part of this Schedule applies,(b) the person satisfies the conditions in section 2(1)(b) to (da) and (f) or (3)(a) to (d) and (f),(c) the Secretary of State is satisfied that the person has been issued with a test certificate, and(d) the person’s driving record, licence or test certificate shows the date on which the person became a qualified driver,the Secretary of State must by notice served on the person revoke the person’s licence and test certificate and this sub-paragraph applies to the person instead of section 3(1).”;(b) omit sub-paragraph (1ZA);(c) in sub-paragraph (1A)—(i) omit “or (1ZA)”, and(ii) for “the Northern Ireland licence and the Northern Ireland test certificate” substitute “—(a) if the Secretary of State is already in receipt of it, the Northern Ireland licence, and(b) if the Secretary of State is already in receipt of it, the Northern Ireland test certificate.”;(d) in sub-paragraph (1B), omit “or (1ZA)”.(8) After paragraph 8 insert—“Surrender of licence and test certificate8A   (1) Where—(a) the Secretary of State is required under paragraph 8(1) or (1B) to serve a notice on a person revoking the person’s licence and test certificate, and(b) the Secretary of State is not already in receipt of the licence or test certificate,the notice may also require the person to surrender the licence, or test certificate, or both (as the case may be) to the Secretary of State before the end of the period of 28 days beginning with the date on which the notice is served.(2) A person who, without reasonable excuse, fails to comply with a requirement imposed under sub-paragraph (1)—(a) is guilty of an offence, and(b) is liable on summary conviction to a fine not exceeding level 3 on the standard scale.(3) Where the Secretary of State receives a Northern Ireland licence or a Northern Ireland test certificate pursuant to a requirement to surrender it imposed under sub-paragraph (1), the Secretary of State must send it to the licensing authority in Northern Ireland.”(2) 
308	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)SCHEDULE 10 – Surrender of licences: minor and consequential amendmentsDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(9) In paragraph 9(1), omit “or (1ZA)”.(10) In paragraph 10(a), omit “or (1ZA)” in both places.SCHEDULE 10	Section 96SURRENDER OF LICENCES: MINOR AND CONSEQUENTIAL AMENDMENTSPART 1AMENDMENTS TO THE ROAD TRAFFIC OFFENDERS ACT 19881 The Road Traffic Offenders Act 1988 is amended as follows.2 (1) Section 2 (requirement of warning etc: supplementary) is amended as follows.(2) In subsection (2)—(a) omit “, or” at the end of paragraph (a);(b) omit paragraph (b).3 (1) Section 26 (interim disqualification) is amended as follows.(2) In subsection (8), omit “has not caused it to be delivered, or has not posted it, in accordance with section 7 of this Act and”.(3) In subsection (9)—(a) omit “, or” at the end of paragraph (a);(b) omit paragraph (b).
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)SCHEDULE 10 – Surrender of licences: minor and consequential amendments Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
309
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes4 (1) Section 27 (production of licence) is amended as follows.(2) In subsection (3), omit “has not caused it to be delivered, or posted it, in accordance with section 7 of this Act and”.(3) Omit subsection (4) (which has already been repealed as it extends to Scotland).(4) Omit subsections (4A) and (5).5 (1) Section 47 (supplementary provisions as to disqualifications and endorsements) is amended as follows.(2) In subsection (2), omit “a court orders the endorsement of a person’s driving record it may, and where”.(3) Omit subsection (2A).6 Omit section 56 (licence receipts).7 (1) Section 57A (endorsement of driving records without hearings) is amended as follows.(2) In subsection (3)—(a) after “penalty is made” insert “in accordance with this Part”;(b) omit “and return to that person any licence surrendered by him under section 54 of this Act”.(3) In subsection (4), omit “and return to that person any licence surrendered by him under section 54 of this Act”.(4) In subsection (5)(b), after “him” insert “in accordance with this Part”.8 (1) Section 61A (fixed penalty notice mistakenly given: exclusion of fixed penalty procedures) is amended as follows.1 
310	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)SCHEDULE 10 – Surrender of licences: minor and consequential amendmentsDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(2) In subsection (3), omit “and send the chief officer of police any licence sent to him under section 54(7) of this Act”.9 (1) Section 69 (payment of penalty) is amended as follows.(2) In subsection (1), omit “or authorised person”.10 (1) Section 70 (registration certificates) is amended as follows.(2) In subsection (2A)(a), omit “or given by an authorised person”.(3) In subsection (3A)(a), omit “or given by an authorised person”.11 (1) Section 79 (statements by constables) is amended as follows.(2) In subsection (1), omit “or a notice under section 54(5) of this Act”.(3) In subsection (6)—(a) omit “, and” at the end of paragraph (a);(b) omit paragraph (b).12 In section 80 (certificates about payment)—(a) in the heading, after “payment” insert “etc”;(b) after paragraph (b) insert “, or(c) that	the	identification	requirements	specified	in section 69(3C) or 75(8B) have been fulfilled,”;(c)	in the words after paragraph (b), for “it” substitute “the penalty”.
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)SCHEDULE 10 – Surrender of licences: minor and consequential amendments Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
311
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes13 (1) In section 84(a) (regulations), omit “54(5), 56,”.(2) The reference in sub-paragraph (1) of this paragraph to section 84(a) is to be read as a reference to section 84(1)(a), if the condition in sub-paragraph (3) is met.(3) The condition is that section 16(3) of the Domestic Violence, Crime and Victims Act 2004 (which amends section 84) comes into force before the repeal of section 54(5) of the Road Traffic Offenders Act 1988 made by section 93(3)(b) of this Act.14 (1) Section 89 (interpretation) is amended as follows.(2) In subsection (1), omit the definition of “authorised person”.(3) In subsection (1), in the definition of “chief officer of police”, omit “(except in the definition of “authorised person”)”.15 (1) Section 90 (index to Part 3) is amended as follows.(2) In the table, omit the entry for “authorised person”.16 In section 91ZA(1) (application to Northern Ireland licence holders), after paragraph (c) insert—“(ca)	section 37A,”.17 In section 91A(1) (application to Community licence holders)—(a) omit “and (9)(b),”;(b) for “and 27” substitute “, 27 and 37A”.(a) 
312	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)SCHEDULE 10 – Surrender of licences: minor and consequential amendmentsDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes18 (1) Schedule 1 (offences to which sections 1, 6, 11 and 12(1) apply) is amended as follows.(2) In paragraph 2(a), after “section” insert “37A or”.(3) In paragraph 2(d)—(a) after “under” insert “section 3A(2) or”;(b) for “3(5)” substitute “5A(2) or 8A(2)”.19 In Part 1 of Schedule 2 (prosecution and punishment of offences), in the entry relating to section 27 of the Road Traffic Offenders Act 1988, for the words in column 2 (general nature of offence) substitute—“Failing to produce licence to court when required to do so.”PART 2AMENDMENTS TO OTHER ACTSRoad Traffic Act 1988 (c. 52)20 The Road Traffic Act 1988 is amended as follows.21 In section 93 (revocation of licence because of disability or prospective disability), omit subsection (4).1 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)SCHEDULE 10 – Surrender of licences: minor and consequential amendments Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
313
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes22 In section 99 (duration of licences), omit subsection (6).23 (1) Section 164 (power of constables to require production of driving licence and in certain cases statement of date of birth) is amended as follows.(2) After subsection (5), insert—“(5A) If a person is required to surrender the person’s licence or test certificate to the Secretary of State under—(a) section 37A of the Road Traffic Offenders Act 1988, or(b) section 3A of, or paragraph 5A or 8A of Schedule 1 to, the Road Traffic (New Drivers) Act 1995,and fails to do so, a constable or vehicle examiner may require the person to produce the licence or test certificate and, upon its being produced, may seize it and deliver it to the Secretary of State.(5B) In subsection (5A), “test certificate” has the same meaning as in Schedule 1 to the Road Traffic (New Drivers) Act 1995.”(3) In subsection (6), for “(7) to” substitute “(8) and”.(4) Omit subsection (7).24 In section 166 (powers of certain officers as respects goods vehicles and passenger- carrying vehicles), for “164(1) or (3)” substitute “164(1), (3) or (5A)”.
314	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)SCHEDULE 10 – Surrender of licences: minor and consequential amendmentsDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesCrime (International Co-operation) Act 2003 (c. 32)25 In section 63 of the Crime (International Co-operation) Act 2003 (production of licence: Great Britain), omit subsection (3).PART 3CONSEQUENTIAL REPEALS OF AMENDING ENACTMENTSRoad Traffic (New Drivers) Act 1995 (c. 13)26 In Schedule 2 to the Road Traffic (New Drivers) Act 1995, omit paragraph 4 (which amends section 47 of the Road Traffic Offenders Act 1988).Access to Justice Act 1999 (c. 22)27 In Schedule 13 to the Access to Justice Act 1999, omit—(a) paragraph 141 (which amends section 7 of the Road Traffic Offenders Act 1988);(b) paragraph 144 (which amends section 27 of that Act);(c) paragraph 173 (which amends paragraph 3 of Schedule 1 to the Road Traffic (New Drivers) Act 1995).
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)SCHEDULE 10 – Surrender of licences: minor and consequential amendments Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
315
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesPolice Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)28 In section 76 of the Police Reform Act 2002, omit subsection (2) (which amends section 54 of the Road Traffic Offenders Act 1988).Courts Act 2003 (c. 39)29 In Schedule 8 to the Courts Act 2003, omit—(a) paragraph 310 (which amends section 7 of the Road Traffic Offenders Act 1988);(b) paragraph 313 (which amends section 27 of that Act);(c) paragraph 365 (which amends paragraph 3 of Schedule 1 to the Road Traffic (New Drivers) Act 1995).Road Safety Act 2006 (c. 49)30 The Road Safety Act 2006 is amended as follows.31 In section 10, omit—(a) subsections (5) and (6) (which amend section 54 of the Road Traffic Offenders Act 1988);(b) subsections (10) and (11) (which amend section 57A of that Act).32 In Schedule 1, omit—(a) paragraph 3(8) (which amends section 54 of the Road Traffic Offenders Act 1988);(b) paragraph 4 (which amends section 56 of that Act);(c) paragraph 18(5) (which amends section 79 of that Act);(a) 
316	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)SCHEDULE 10 – Surrender of licences: minor and consequential amendmentsDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(d) paragraph 25 (which amends section 2 of the Road Traffic (New Drivers) Act 1995);(e) paragraph 26(3) and (4) (which amend section 3 of that Act);(f) paragraph 27(2), (3), (4), (5)(a) and (b), (6), (7), (8)(a) and (b), (9) and (10) (which amend Schedule 1 to that Act).33 In Schedule 2, omit paragraph 25(2)(b) (which amends section 76 of the Road Traffic Offenders Act 1988).34 In Schedule 3, omit—(a) paragraph 5(3) and (4) (which amend section 93 of the Road Traffic Act 1988);(b) paragraph 9(5) (which amends section 99 of that Act);(c) paragraph 26(6) (which amends section 164 of that Act);(d) paragraph 32(3) and (4) (which amend section 26 of the Road Traffic Offenders Act 1988);(e) paragraph 33(5) (which amends section 27 of that Act);(f) paragraph 44(3) (which amends section 47 of that Act);(g) paragraph 46 (which amends section 56 of that Act);(h) paragraph 49(3) (which amends section 61A of that Act);(i) paragraph 54 (which amends section 77A of that Act);(j) paragraph 67(2), (3)(a) and (b) and (4) (which amend section 2 of the Road Traffic (New Drivers) Act 1995);(k) paragraph 68 (which amends section 3 of that Act);(l) paragraph 70 (which amends Schedule 1 to that Act).
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32) SCHEDULE 11 – Cautions: consequential amendments Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
317
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesCriminal Justice and Courts Act 2015 (c. 2)35 In Schedule 11 to the Criminal Justice and Courts Act 2015, omit—(a) paragraph 9 (which amends section 7 of the Road Traffic Offenders Act 1988);(b) paragraph 11 (which amends section 27 of that Act).PROSPECTIVESCHEDULE 11	Section 119CAUTIONS: CONSEQUENTIAL AMENDMENTSRehabilitation of Offenders Act 1974 (c. 53)1 The Rehabilitation of Offenders Act 1974 is amended as follows.2 In section 8A (protection afforded to spent cautions), in subsection (2)—(a) for paragraph (a) substitute—“(aa) a diversionary caution under Part 6 of the Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022;(ab)  a community caution under that Part of that Act;(ac) a caution given under section 22 of the Criminal Justice Act 2003 (conditional cautions) in respect of an offence committed before the coming into force of section 118 of the Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022;(ad) a caution given under section 66A of the Crime and Disorder Act 1998 (conditional cautions for children and young persons);”;(b) in paragraph (d), for “(a) or” substitute “(aa) to”.(a) 
318	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)SCHEDULE 11 – Cautions: consequential amendmentsDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesCommencement InformationI572 Sch. 11 para. 2 not in force at Royal Assent, see s. 208(1)3 (1) Schedule 2 (protection for spent cautions) is amended as follows.(2) In paragraph 1(1)(a), for the words from “conditional” to “section 8A(2)(a))” substitute “caution referred to in section 8A(2)(aa), (ac) or (ad)”.(3) In paragraph 2(1)(f), for “conditional caution” substitute “caution referred to in section 8A(2)(aa) to (ad)”.Commencement InformationI573 Sch. 11 para. 3 not in force at Royal Assent, see s. 208(1)Commencement InformationI571 Sch. 11 para. 1 not in force at Royal Assent, see s. 208(1) I572 Sch. 11 para. 2 not in force at Royal Assent, see s. 208(1) I573 Sch. 11 para. 3 not in force at Royal Assent, see s. 208(1)Bail Act 1976 (c. 63)4 The Bail Act 1976 is amended as follows.Commencement InformationI574 Sch. 11 para. 4 not in force at Royal Assent, see s. 208(1)5 In section 3A (conditions of bail in case of police bail), in subsection (1), for “Part 3 of the Criminal Justice Act 2003” substitute “Part 6 of the Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022”.Commencement InformationI575 Sch. 11 para. 5 not in force at Royal Assent, see s. 208(1)6 In section 5A (supplementary provision in case of police bail), in subsection (1), for “Part 3 of the Criminal Justice Act 2003” substitute “Part 6 of the Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022”.Commencement InformationI576 Sch. 11 para. 6 not in force at Royal Assent, see s. 208(1)7 Paragraphs 5 and 6 do not affect the operation of the Bail Act 1976 in relation to bail granted under Part 3 of the Criminal Justice Act 2003 in relation to offences committed before the day on which section 118(2) comes into force.
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32) SCHEDULE 11 – Cautions: consequential amendments Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
319
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesCommencement InformationI577 Sch. 11 para. 7 not in force at Royal Assent, see s. 208(1)Commencement InformationI574 Sch. 11 para. 4 not in force at Royal Assent, see s. 208(1) I575 Sch. 11 para. 5 not in force at Royal Assent, see s. 208(1) I576 Sch. 11 para. 6 not in force at Royal Assent, see s. 208(1) I577 Sch. 11 para. 7 not in force at Royal Assent, see s. 208(1)Matrimonial and Family Proceedings Act 1984 (c. 42)8 In section 31R of the Matrimonial and Family Proceedings Act 1984 (prohibition of cross-examination in person: victims of offences), in subsection (5), in paragraph (a) of the definition of “caution”, for sub-paragraph (i) substitute—“(i) a diversionary caution or community caution given under Part 6 of the Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022,(ia) a caution given under section 22 of the Criminal Justice Act 2003 (conditional cautions) in respect of an offence committed before the coming into force of section 118 of the Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022,”.Commencement InformationI578 Sch. 11 para. 8 not in force at Royal Assent, see s. 208(1)Police Act 1997 (c. 50)9 The Police Act 1997 is amended as follows.Commencement InformationI579 Sch. 11 para. 9 not in force at Royal Assent, see s. 208(1)10 (1) Section 112 (criminal conviction certificates) is amended as follows.(2) In subsection (2), in paragraphs (a) and (b), for “conditional” substitute “relevant”.(3) In subsection (3)—(a) in the definition of “central records” for “conditional” substitute “relevant”;(b) omit the definition of “conditional caution”;(c) at the end insert—““relevant caution” means—(a) a diversionary caution given under Part 6 of the Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022,(b) a caution given under section 22 of the Criminal Justice Act 2003 (conditional cautions) in respect of an offence committed
320	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)SCHEDULE 11 – Cautions: consequential amendmentsDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32) SCHEDULE 11 – Cautions: consequential amendments Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
321
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesCommencement InformationI584 Sch. 11 para. 14 not in force at Royal Assent, see s. 208(1)15 In section 60B (notification of decision not to prosecute person interviewed), in subsection (4)—(a) for “includes” substitute “means”;(b) for paragraph (a) substitute—“(a)	a diversionary or community caution under Part 6 of the Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022;”.Commencement InformationI585 Sch. 11 para. 15 not in force at Royal Assent, see s. 208(1)16 In section 63B (testing for presence of Class A drugs), in subsection (7)(aa), for “conditional caution under Part 3 of the Criminal Justice Act 2003” substitute “diversionary caution under Part 6 of the Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022”.Commencement InformationI586 Sch. 11 para. 16 not in force at Royal Assent, see s. 208(1)17 Omit section 63L (which relates to persons given a penalty notice).Commencement InformationI587 Sch. 11 para. 17 not in force at Royal Assent, see s. 208(1)18 In section 64A (photographing of suspects), in subsection (1B)—(a) after paragraph (ca) insert—“(cb)	given a diversionary or community caution under Part 6 of the Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022;”;(b) in paragraph (d), omit the words from “a penalty notice” to “2001,”;(c) after paragraph (e) insert “or”;(d) omit paragraph (g) (and the “or” immediately before it).Commencement InformationI588 Sch. 11 para. 18 not in force at Royal Assent, see s. 208(1)19 Paragraphs 13 to 18 do not affect the operation of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 in relation to conditional cautions given under Part 3 of the Criminal Justice Act 2003, or penalty notices given under section 2 of the Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001, in relation to offences committed before the day on which section 118(2) and (3) come into force.
322	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)SCHEDULE 11 – Cautions: consequential amendmentsDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesCommencement InformationI589 Sch. 11 para. 19 not in force at Royal Assent, see s. 208(1)Commencement InformationI582 Sch. 11 para. 12 not in force at Royal Assent, see s. 208(1) I583 Sch. 11 para. 13 not in force at Royal Assent, see s. 208(1) I584 Sch. 11 para. 14 not in force at Royal Assent, see s. 208(1) I585 Sch. 11 para. 15 not in force at Royal Assent, see s. 208(1) I586 Sch. 11 para. 16 not in force at Royal Assent, see s. 208(1) I587 Sch. 11 para. 17 not in force at Royal Assent, see s. 208(1) I588 Sch. 11 para. 18 not in force at Royal Assent, see s. 208(1) I589 Sch. 11 para. 19 not in force at Royal Assent, see s. 208(1)Crime and Disorder Act 1998 (c. 37)20 The Crime and Disorder Act 1998 is amended as follows.Commencement InformationI590 Sch. 11 para. 20 not in force at Royal Assent, see s. 208(1)21 In section 66E (failure to comply with conditions), for subsections (4) and (5) substitute—“(4) If a constable has reasonable grounds for believing that the offender has failed without reasonable excuse to comply with any of the conditions attached to a youth conditional caution, the constable may arrest the offender without warrant.(5) Sections 106(2) to (10) and 107 of the Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 apply in relation to a person arrested under subsection (4) above.”Commencement InformationI591 Sch. 11 para. 21 not in force at Royal Assent, see s. 208(1)22 In section 66G (code of practice), in subsection (2)—(a) in paragraph (j), for the words from “conferred by” to the end substitute “under section 66E(4)”;(b) in paragraph (k), for “section 24A(2) of that Act” substitute “section 106(2) and (3) of the Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022”.Commencement InformationI592 Sch. 11 para. 22 not in force at Royal Assent, see s. 208(1)
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32) SCHEDULE 11 – Cautions: consequential amendments Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
323
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesCommencement InformationI590 Sch. 11 para. 20 not in force at Royal Assent, see s. 208(1) I591 Sch. 11 para. 21 not in force at Royal Assent, see s. 208(1) I592 Sch. 11 para. 22 not in force at Royal Assent, see s. 208(1)Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)23 The Police Reform Act 2002 is amended as follows.Commencement InformationI593 Sch. 11 para. 23 not in force at Royal Assent, see s. 208(1)24 In section 43 (railways safety accreditation scheme)—(a) in subsection (6), omit “Subject to subsection (7)”;(b) omit subsection (7).Commencement InformationI594 Sch. 11 para. 24 not in force at Royal Assent, see s. 208(1)25 In Schedule 5 (powers exercisable by accredited persons), omit the following—(a) paragraph 1(2)(aa) and (2A);(b) paragraph 4 and the preceding italic heading;(c) paragraph 9A and the preceding italic heading.Commencement InformationI595 Sch. 11 para. 25 not in force at Royal Assent, see s. 208(1)26 Omit Schedule 5A (powers exercisable by accredited inspectors).Commencement InformationI596 Sch. 11 para. 26 not in force at Royal Assent, see s. 208(1)Commencement InformationI593 Sch. 11 para. 23 not in force at Royal Assent, see s. 208(1) I594 Sch. 11 para. 24 not in force at Royal Assent, see s. 208(1) I595 Sch. 11 para. 25 not in force at Royal Assent, see s. 208(1) I596 Sch. 11 para. 26 not in force at Royal Assent, see s. 208(1)Licensing Act 2003 (c. 17)27 In section 147A of the Licensing Act 2003 (persistently selling alcohol to children), in subsection (7), omit paragraph (c) and the preceding “or”.
324	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)SCHEDULE 11 – Cautions: consequential amendmentsDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesCommencement InformationI597 Sch. 11 para. 27 not in force at Royal Assent, see s. 208(1)Courts Act 2003 (c. 39)28 The Courts Act 2003 is amended as follows.Commencement InformationI598 Sch. 11 para. 28 not in force at Royal Assent, see s. 208(1)29 In section 85EA (prohibition of cross-examination in person: victims of offences), in subsection (5), in paragraph (a) of the definition of “caution”, for sub- paragraph (i) substitute—“(i) a diversionary caution or community caution given under Part 6 of the Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022,(ia) a caution given under section 22 of the Criminal Justice Act 2003 (conditional cautions) in respect of an offence committed before the coming into force of section 118 of the Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022,”.Commencement InformationI599 Sch. 11 para. 29 not in force at Royal Assent, see s. 208(1)30 In Schedule 5 (collection of fines), in paragraph 3(1)(b), for sub-paragraph (ii) substitute—“(ii) section 112 of the Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022, or”.Commencement InformationI600 Sch. 11 para. 30 not in force at Royal Assent, see s. 208(1)Commencement InformationI598 Sch. 11 para. 28 not in force at Royal Assent, see s. 208(1) I599 Sch. 11 para. 29 not in force at Royal Assent, see s. 208(1) I600 Sch. 11 para. 30 not in force at Royal Assent, see s. 208(1)Criminal Justice Act 2003 (c. 44)31 In section 330 of the Criminal Justice Act 2003 (orders and rules), in subsection (5)—(a) in paragraph (a), omit “section 25(5)”;(b) omit paragraph (aa).
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32) SCHEDULE 11 – Cautions: consequential amendments Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
325
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesCommencement InformationI601 Sch. 11 para. 31 not in force at Royal Assent, see s. 208(1)Offender Management Act 2007 (c. 21)32 (1) Section 1 of the Offender Management Act 2007 (meaning of “the probation purposes”) is amended as follows.(2) In subsection (1)—(a) in paragraph (b)—(i) for “conditional cautions”, in the first place, substitute “diversionary or community cautions”;(ii) for “conditional cautions”, in the second place, substitute “them”;(b) in paragraph (e), for “conditional cautions” substitute “diversionary or community cautions”.(3) In subsection (4), omit the definition of “conditional caution”.(4) In subsection (5), for “conditional cautions” substitute “diversionary or community cautions”.Commencement InformationI602 Sch. 11 para. 32 not in force at Royal Assent, see s. 208(1)Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)33 The Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is amended as follows.Commencement InformationI603 Sch. 11 para. 33 not in force at Royal Assent, see s. 208(1)34 In section 101 (community remedy document), in subsection (9), in the definition of “out of court disposal process”, for “conditional caution” substitute “diversionary caution, community caution”.Commencement InformationI604 Sch. 11 para. 34 not in force at Royal Assent, see s. 208(1)35 (1) Section 102 (out-of-court disposals) is amended as follows.(2) In subsection (2)—(a) after paragraph (b) insert—“(ba) a person authorised by a prosecution authority under section 98(7) of the Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 for purposes relating to diversionary or community cautions;”;
326	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)SCHEDULE 11 – Cautions: consequential amendmentsDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)SCHEDULE 12 – Minimum sentences for particular offences: consequential amendments Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
327
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(b) sections 17 and 18 of the Police and Justice Act 2006;(c) paragraphs 60 to 62 of Schedule 26 to the Criminal Justice and Immigration Act 2008;(d) sections 133 and 134 of the Legal Aid, Sentencing and Punishment of Offenders Act 2012;(e) section 103(1) of the Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014;(f) sections 60, 64(8) and 66(10) of, and paragraph 16(2) of Schedule 12 to, the Policing and Crime Act 2017;(g) paragraphs 14 to 16 and 23 of Schedule 4 to this Act.(2) Sub-paragraph (1) does not affect the continuing operation of the repealed provisions in relation to cautions given under Part 3 of the Criminal Justice Act 2003 in respect of offences committed before the day on which section 118(2) comes into force.39	(1) Omit the following (which make amendments to Chapter 1 of Part 1 of the Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001, which is repealed by section 118(3) above)—(a) section 15 of the Domestic Violence, Crime and Victims Act 2004;(b) section 132 of, and Schedule 23 to, the Legal Aid, Sentencing and Punishment of Offenders Act 2012.(2) Sub-paragraph (1) does not affect the continuing operation of the repealed provisions in relation to penalty notices given under Chapter 1 of Part 1 of the Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 in respect of offences committed before the day on which section 118(3) comes into force.SCHEDULE 12	Section 124MINIMUM SENTENCES FOR PARTICULAR OFFENCES: CONSEQUENTIAL AMENDMENTSMental Health Act 1983 (c. 20)1 In section 37 of the Mental Health Act 1983 (power to order hospital admission or guardianship), in subsection (1B)(d), for “312(2), 313(2), 314(2) or 315(2)” substitute “312(2A), 313(2A), 314(2A) or 315(2A)”.1 
328	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)SCHEDULE 12 – Minimum sentences for particular offences: consequential amendmentsDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesArmed Forces Act 2006 (c. 52)2 The Armed Forces Act 2006 is amended as follows.3 In section 225(2) (third drug trafficking offence)—(a) for “section 313(2)” substitute “section 313(2A)”,(b) for “particular circumstances” substitute “exceptional circumstances”, and(c) for paragraph (b) substitute—“(b)	justify not doing so.”4 In section 226(2) (third domestic burglary)—(a) for “section 314(2)” substitute “section 314(2A)”,(b) for “particular circumstances” substitute “exceptional circumstances”, and(c) for paragraph (b) substitute—“(b)	justify not doing so.”5 (1) Section 227A (offences of threatening with a weapon in public or on school premises) is amended as follows.(2) In subsection (1A)—(a) for “particular circumstances” substitute “exceptional circumstances”, and(b) for paragraph (b) substitute—“(b)	justify not doing so.”(3) Sub-paragraph (2) has effect only if this Schedule comes into force before the coming into force of paragraph 16(a) of Schedule 26 to the Sentencing Act 2020 (which omits subsection (1A) of section 227A of the Armed Forces Act 2006).(4) In subsection (2)—(a) for “particular circumstances” substitute “exceptional circumstances”, and(b) for paragraph (b) substitute—“(b)	justify not doing so.”
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)SCHEDULE 12 – Minimum sentences for particular offences: consequential amendments Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
329
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes6 In section 237 (duty to have regard to purposes of sentencing etc), in subsection (3)—(a) in paragraph (bc), for “section 313(2)” substitute “section 313(2A)”, and(b) in paragraph (bd), for “section 314(2)” substitute “section 314(2A)”.7 (1) Section 239 (reduction in sentences for guilty pleas) is amended as follows.(2) In subsection (4), for “section 313(2) or 314(2)” substitute “section 313(2A) or 314(2A)”.(3) In subsection (5), for “section 313(2) or 314(2)”, in both places it occurs, substitute “section 313(2A) or 314(2A)”.8 In section 260 (discretionary custodial sentences: general restrictions), in subsection (1)—(a) in paragraph (e), for “section 313(2)” substitute “section 313(2A)”, and(b) in paragraph (f), for “section 314(2)” substitute “section 314(2A)”.9 In section 273 (review of unduly lenient sentence by Court Martial Appeal Court), in subsection (6)(b)—(a) in sub-paragraph (iv), for “section 313(2)” substitute “section 313(2A)”, and(b) in sub-paragraph (v), for “section 314(2)” substitute “section 314(2A)”.
330	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)SCHEDULE 13 – Removal of attendance centre requirements for adults: related amendmentsDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesSCHEDULE 13	Section 152REMOVAL OF ATTENDANCE CENTRE REQUIREMENTS FOR ADULTS: RELATED AMENDMENTSPowers of Criminal Courts (Sentencing) Act 2000 (c. 6)1 The Powers of Criminal Courts (Sentencing) Act 2000 is amended as follows.2 (1) Section 60 (attendance centre orders) is amended as follows (but see sub- paragraph (4)).(2) In subsection (1)—(a) in paragraph (b), for “21” substitute “18”;(b) omit paragraph (c) and the word “or” before it.(3) In subsection (4)(b), for the words from “16 or over” to the end, substitute “16 or 17”.(4) Sub-paragraphs (1) to (3) have no effect if paragraph 102 of Schedule 32 to the Criminal Justice Act 2003 (which confines the effect of section 60 to persons aged under 16) is in force when this paragraph comes into force.3 In Schedule 5 (further provision about attendance centre orders), in paragraph 7(1), omit “or (c)”.
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)SCHEDULE 13 – Removal of attendance centre requirements for adults: related amendments Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
331
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesCriminal Justice Act 2003 (c. 44)4 The Criminal Justice Act 2003 (the “2003 Act”) is amended as follows.5 (1) Section 221 (provision of attendance centres) is amended as follows.(2) In subsection (2), omit “aged under 25”.(3) After subsection (3) insert—“(4) In this section “relevant order” means—(a) an order under section 177(1) (community order) or 189(1) (suspended sentence order);(b) a relevant order within the meaning given by section 397 of the Sentencing Code, made in respect of an offence of which the offender was convicted before the day on which paragraph 5 of Schedule 13 to the Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 came into force.”6 (1) In section 300(2) (power to impose attendance centre requirement on fine defaulter)—(a) if the relevant amendment is not in force when this paragraph comes into force, in paragraph (c) for “under 25” substitute “under 18”;(b) if the relevant amendment is in force when this paragraph comes into force, omit paragraph (c) and the word “or” before it.(2) In sub-paragraph (1) the “relevant amendment” means paragraph 2(3)(a)(i) of Schedule 26 to the Criminal Justice and Immigration Act 2008 (which confines the application of section 300(2) of the 2003 Act to those over 18).7 If paragraph 102 of Schedule 32 is not in force when this paragraph comes into force, in sub-paragraph (2)(b) of that paragraph 102 (amendment of section 61(1)(b) of the Powers of Criminal Courts (Sentencing) Act 2000), for “21” substitute “18”.1 
332	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)SCHEDULE 13 – Removal of attendance centre requirements for adults: related amendmentsDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesSentencing Code8 The Sentencing Code is amended as follows.9 (1) Schedule 11 (transfer of community orders to Scotland or Northern Ireland) is amended as follows.(2) In paragraph 12(2)—(a) at the end of paragraph (g) insert “, where such a requirement is available (see section 207(3))”;(b) at the end of paragraph (h) insert “, where such a requirement is available (see section 207(4))”.(3) In paragraph 25(3), omit paragraph (b) (but not the “or” at the end of that paragraph).10 (1) Schedule 17 (transfer of suspended sentence orders to Scotland or Northern Ireland) is amended as follows.(2) In paragraph 9(2)—(a) at the end of paragraph (g) insert “, where such a requirement is available (see section 291(3))”;(b) at the end of paragraph (h) insert “, where such a requirement is available (see section 291(4))”.(3) In paragraph 32—(2) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)SCHEDULE 14 – Community and suspended sentence orders: special procedures relating to review and breachDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
333
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(a) in sub-paragraph (2), omit paragraph (b) (but not the “or” at the end of that paragraph);(b) in sub-paragraph (5)—(i) at the end of paragraph (g) insert “, where such a requirement is available (see section 291(3))”;(ii) at the end of paragraph (h) insert “, where such a requirement is available (see section 291(4))”.SCHEDULE 14	Section 153COMMUNITY AND SUSPENDED SENTENCE ORDERS: SPECIAL PROCEDURES RELATING TO REVIEW AND BREACHPART 1AMENDMENTS TO THE SENTENCING CODEIntroductory1 The Sentencing Code is amended as specified in this Part of this Schedule.Orders that qualify for special procedures2 After section 395 insert—1 
334	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)SCHEDULE 14 – Community and suspended sentence orders: special procedures relating to review              and breach Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes“395A Community and suspended sentence orders qualifying for special procedures(1) A community order or suspended sentence order qualifies for special procedures for the purposes of a relevant provision if the order—(a) is of a description specified in regulations for the purposes of that provision, and(b) is made within a period, or after a time, so specified.(2) In subsection (1) “relevant provision” means—(a) section 217A;(b) section 293A;(c) paragraphs 10(5)(ba) and 11(2)(ba) of Schedule 10;(d) paragraph 13(1)(da) of Schedule 16.(3) A description specified under subsection (1)(a) may, among other things, be framed by reference to—(a) the courts by which the orders are made (for example, courts sitting in particular places or areas);(b) the persons who are subject to the orders (for example, persons of a particular sex);(c) the offences to which the orders relate.(4) Where regulations under subsection (1)(a) specify a description of community or suspended sentence order for the first time, they must under subsection (1)(b) specify, in relation to that description of order, a period of 18 months beginning with the day on which the regulations come into force.(5) Regulations under this section are to be made by the Secretary of State.(6) Regulations under this section are subject to—(a) the negative resolution procedure, where under subsection (1)(b) the regulations specify a period, and(b) the affirmative resolution procedure, in any other case.”Review of community orders3 (1) Section 211 (power of Crown Court to direct magistrates’ court supervision) is amended as follows.(2) The existing provision becomes subsection (1).(3) After that subsection insert—“(2) Subsection (1) does not apply to a community order that qualifies for special procedures for the purposes of section 217A.”
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)SCHEDULE 14 – Community and suspended sentence orders: special procedures relating to review and breachDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
335
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes4 In section 217 (power to provide for court review of community orders), after subsection (2) insert—“(2A) Regulations under this section may not make provision in respect of community orders which for the purposes of section 217A qualify for special procedures.”5 After section 217 insert—“217A Review of community order qualifying for special procedures(1) A community order that—(a) imposes one or more community order requirements, and(b) qualifies for special procedures for the purposes of this section,may make provision for the order to be reviewed periodically (“provision for review”).(2) Where a community order contains provision for review under this section, it must—(a) specify the intervals at which the order is to be reviewed,(b) provide for each review to be made, subject to section 217B, at a hearing held for the purpose by the responsible court (a “review hearing”),(c) require the offender to attend each review hearing, and(d) provide for a report by an officer of a provider of probation services on the offender’s progress in complying with the community order requirements of the order (a “progress report”) to be made to the responsible court before each review.(3) In this section “the responsible court”, in relation to a community order, means the court by which the order is made.(4) For more about community orders that qualify for special procedures, see section 395A.217B Powers on review(1) This section applies where a review hearing is held on a review of a community order by virtue of section 217A.(2) The court may, after considering the progress report, amend—(a) the community order requirements of the order, or(b) any provision of the order which relates to those requirements.(a) 
336	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)SCHEDULE 14 – Community and suspended sentence orders: special procedures relating to review              and breach Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(3) But the court—(a) may not amend the community order requirements of the order so as to impose a requirement of a different kind unless the offender expresses willingness to comply with that requirement,(b) may not amend—(i) a mental health treatment requirement,(ii) a drug rehabilitation requirement, or(iii) an alcohol treatment requirement,unless the offender expresses willingness to comply with the requirement as amended, and(c) except with the consent of the offender, may not amend the order while an appeal against the order is pending.(4) For the purposes of subsection (3)(a)—(a) a community order requirement of a kind within any entry in the table in section 201 is of the same kind as any other community requirement within that entry, and(b) an electronic compliance monitoring requirement is a requirement of the same kind as any requirement within that table to which it relates.(5) If the court is of the opinion that the offender has without reasonable excuse breached a community order requirement of the order, the court may adjourn the hearing so that the court can deal with the case forthwith under paragraph 10 or 11 of Schedule 10 (powers of court to deal with offender on breach of requirement).(6) For some powers available where the court is of the opinion referred to in subsection (5) but does not deal with the case forthwith, see paragraph 9A of Schedule 10.(7) In this section—“review hearing”, and “progress report”,have the same meanings as in section 217A.217C Alteration of review arrangements(1) Subsections (2) and (3) apply where a court—(a) considers the progress report relating to a review under section 217A (the “current review”), and(b) forms the opinion that the offender’s progress in complying with the community order requirements of the community order is satisfactory.(2) If the court forms that opinion before a review hearing is held at the current review—(a) it may order that no review hearing is to be held at the current review, and(b) it may amend the community order so as to provide for each subsequent review to be held without a review hearing.(a) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)SCHEDULE 14 – Community and suspended sentence orders: special procedures relating to review and breachDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
337
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(3) If a review hearing is held at the current review, the court may at the hearing amend the community order so as to provide for each subsequent review to be held without a review hearing.(4) If at a review held without a review hearing the court—(a) considers the progress report, and(b) forms the opinion that the offender’s progress under the order is no longer satisfactory,it may require the offender to attend a hearing of the court at a specified time and place.(5) At a review hearing the court may amend the community order so as to vary the intervals specified under section 217A(2)(a).(6) The functions of a court under this section that are exercisable in relation to a review without a hearing are to be exercised—(a) where the court is the Crown Court, by a judge of the court, and(b) where the court is a magistrates’ court, by a justice of the peace.(7) In this section—“review hearing”, and “progress report”,have the same meanings as in section 217A.”Review of suspended sentence orders6 In section 293 (review of suspended sentence orders), at the end insert—“(7) Nothing in this section applies in relation to suspended sentence orders which qualify for special procedures for the purposes of section 293A.”7 After section 293 insert—“293A Review of suspended sentence order qualifying for special procedures(1) A suspended sentence order that—(1) 
338	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)SCHEDULE 14 – Community and suspended sentence orders: special procedures relating to review              and breach Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(a) imposes one or more community requirements, and(b) qualifies for special procedures for the purposes of this section,may make provision for the order to be reviewed periodically (“provision for review”).(2) Where a suspended sentence order contains provision for review under this section, it must—(a) specify the intervals at which the order is to be reviewed,(b) provide for each review to be made, subject to section 294, at a hearing held for the purpose by the responsible court (a “review hearing”),(c) require the offender to attend each review hearing, and(d) provide for a report by an officer of a provider of probation services on the offender’s progress in complying with the community requirements of the order (a “progress report”) to be made to the responsible court before each review.(3) In this section “the responsible court”, in relation to a suspended sentence order, means the court by which the order is made.(4) For more about suspended sentence orders that qualify for special procedures, see section 395A.”8 (1) Section 294 (review hearings) is amended as follows.(2) In subsection (1), after “293” insert “or 293A”.(3) In subsection (5), after “the case” insert “forthwith”.(4) After subsection (5) insert—“(5A) For some powers available where the court is of the opinion referred to in subsection (5) but does not deal with the case forthwith, see paragraph 9A of Schedule 16.”(5) In subsection (6), after “293(2)” insert “(or, as the case may be, section 293A(2))”.9 (1) Section 295 (alteration of review arrangements) is amended as follows.(2) In subsection (1), after “a review” insert “under section 293 or 293A”.(3) In subsection (5), after “293(2)(a)” insert “or 293A(2)(a)”.(4) In subsection (7), after “293(2)” insert “(or, as the case may be, section 293A(2))”.(2) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)SCHEDULE 14 – Community and suspended sentence orders: special procedures relating to review and breachDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
339
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes10 (1) Section 297 (power to direct magistrates’ court supervision) is amended as follows.(2) The existing provision becomes subsection (1).(3) After that subsection insert—“(2) Subsection (1) does not apply to a suspended sentence order that qualifies for special procedures for the purposes of section 293A.”Review of drug rehabilitation requirements11 In Schedule 9 (community orders and suspended sentence orders: community requirements), in paragraph 21 (review of drug rehabilitation requirements), at the end insert—“(7) Nothing in this paragraph or paragraph 22 applies in relation to—(a) a community order that qualifies for special procedures for the purposes of section 217A, or(b) a suspended sentence order that qualifies for special procedures for the purposes of section 293A.”Breach of community order: power to commit to custody12 (1) Schedule 10 (breach etc of community order) is amended as follows.(2) In paragraph 1 (interpretation), in the definition of “appropriate court” in sub- paragraph (1)—(a) after paragraph (a) insert—“(aa) if the community order qualifies for special procedures for the purposes of section 217A, the court that made the order;”;
340	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)SCHEDULE 14 – Community and suspended sentence orders: special procedures relating to review              and breach Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(b) in paragraph (b), after the second “order” insert “and does not fall within paragraph (aa)”.(3) In paragraph 8 (issue of summons or warrant by justice of the peace), in sub- paragraph (3)—(a) in paragraph (a), omit the final “or”;(b) after paragraph (a) insert—“(aa) in the case of a community order that qualifies for special procedures for the purposes of section 217A, before the court that made the order, or”.(4) After paragraph 9 insert—“Issue of summons or warrant after review hearing9A   (1) This paragraph applies where—(a) a community order is in force,(b) on a review hearing under section 217B a magistrates’ court or the Crown Court (“the court”) is of the opinion that the offender has without reasonable excuse breached a community order requirement of the order, and(c) the court does not deal with the case forthwith by virtue of section 217B(5).(2) The court may at any time—(a) issue a summons requiring the offender to appear at the place and time specified in it, or(b) issue a warrant for the offender’s arrest.(3) A summons or warrant issued under this paragraph must direct the offender to appear or be brought before the court which issued it.(4) Where—(a) a summons is issued under this paragraph, and  (b) the offender does not appear in answer to the summons, the court may issue a warrant for the arrest of the offender.”(5) In paragraph 10—(a) in sub-paragraph (1), after “paragraph 8” insert “or 9A or by virtue of section 217B(5)”;(b) in sub-paragraph (5), after paragraph (b) insert—“(ba) if the community order qualifies for special procedures for the purposes of this paragraph, by ordering the offender to be committed to prison for such period not exceeding 28 days as the court considers appropriate (but see also paragraph 13A);”.(6) In paragraph 11—(a) in sub-paragraph (1)(a)—(i) after “paragraph 9” insert “or 9A”;(ii) after “10(3)” insert “or section 217B(5)”;(b) in sub-paragraph (2), after paragraph (b) insert—(a) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)SCHEDULE 14 – Community and suspended sentence orders: special procedures relating to review and breachDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
341
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes“(ba) if the community order qualifies for special procedures for the purposes of this paragraph, by ordering the offender to be committed to prison for such period not exceeding 28 days as the court considers appropriate (but see also paragraph 13A);”.(7) After paragraph 13 insert—“Power under paragraphs 10 and 11 to commit to prison: further provision13A  (1) In the case of a person under the age of 21—(a) an order under paragraph 10(5)(ba) or 11(2)(ba) must be for committal to a young offender institution instead of to prison, but(b) the Secretary of State may from time to time direct that a person committed to a young offender institution by such an order is to be detained in a prison or remand centre instead.(2) A person committed to prison or a young offender institution by an order under paragraph 10(5)(ba) or 11(2)(ba) is to be regarded as being in legal custody.(3) No more than three orders under paragraph 10(5)(ba) or 11(2)(ba) may be made in relation to the same community order.”(8) In paragraph 14 (revocation etc of community order subject to magistrates’ court supervision), in sub-paragraph (2)—(a) in paragraph (a), omit the final “and”;(b) after paragraph (a) insert—“(aa) if the community order qualifies for special procedures for the purposes of section 217A, the court that made the order, and”.Breach of suspended sentence order: power to commit to custody13 (1) Schedule 16 (breach etc of suspended sentence order) is amended as follows.(2) In paragraph 4—(a) in sub-paragraph (1)(a), after “293(1)” insert “or 293A(1)”;(b) in sub-paragraph (2)(a), after “293(4)” insert “or 293A(3)”.(3) After paragraph 9 insert—“Issue of summons or warrant after review hearing in special procedure cases9A	(1) This paragraph applies where—(a) a suspended sentence order is subject to review in accordance with section 293A(1),(a) 
342	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)SCHEDULE 14 – Community and suspended sentence orders: special procedures relating to review              and breach Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(b) on a review hearing under section 294(5) a magistrates’ court or the Crown Court (“the court”) is of the opinion that the offender has without reasonable excuse breached a community requirement of the order, and(c) the court does not deal with the case forthwith under section 294(5).(2) The court may at any time—(a) issue a summons requiring the offender to appear at the place and time specified in it, or(b) issue a warrant for the offender’s arrest.(3) A summons or warrant issued under this paragraph must direct the offender to appear or be brought before the court which issued it.(4) Where—(a) a summons is issued under this paragraph, and  (b) the offender does not appear in answer to the summons, the court may issue a warrant for the arrest of the offender.”(4) In paragraph 10, in sub-paragraph (1)(a)(i), after “8” insert “or 9A”.(5) In paragraph 12, in sub-paragraph (2)(a)(i), after “9” insert “or 9A”.(6) In paragraph 13, in sub-paragraph (1), after paragraph (d) insert—“(da) in a case where the suspended sentence order qualifies for special procedures for the purposes of this paragraph, the court is dealing with the case by virtue of paragraph 10 or 12(2) and the offender is aged 18 or over, the court may order the offender to be committed to prison for such period not exceeding 28 days as the court considers appropriate (but see also paragraph 13A);”.(7) In paragraph 14 (duty to make activation order where not unjust), in sub- paragraph (2)—(a) in paragraph (a), omit the final “and”;(b) after paragraph (b) insert “, and(c) in a case where the suspended sentence order qualifies for special procedures for the purposes of paragraph 13(1)(da), the court is dealing with the case by virtue of paragraph 10 or 12(2) and the offender is aged 18 or over, the possibility of making an order under paragraph 13(1)(da).”(8) After paragraph 16 insert—“Power under paragraph 13(1)(da) to commit to prison: further provision16A  (1) In the case of an offender under the age of 21—(a) an order under paragraph 13(1)(da) must be for committal to a young offender institution instead of to prison, but(b) the Secretary of State may from time to time direct that a person committed to a young offender institution by such an order is to be detained in a prison or remand centre instead.(a) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)SCHEDULE 14 – Community and suspended sentence orders: special procedures relating to review and breachDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
343
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(2) A person committed to prison or a young offender institution by an order under paragraph 13(1)(da) is to be regarded as being in legal custody.(3) No more than three orders under paragraph 13(1)(da) may be made in relation to the same suspended sentence order.”PART 2PROSPECTIVE AMENDMENTSProspective amendments relating to abolition of detention in a young offender institution14 (1) Schedule 22 of the Sentencing Act 2020 (prospective amendments) is amended as follows.(2) In paragraph 21 (powers to imprison for breach of community order)—(a) in sub-paragraph (2)(a), in the inserted paragraph (d), after sub-paragraph (i) insert—“(ia) the order does not qualify for special procedures for the purposes of paragraph (ba);”;(b) in sub-paragraph (3)(a), in the inserted paragraph (d), before sub- paragraph (i) insert—“(ai) the community order does not qualify for special procedures for the purposes of paragraph (ba),”.(3) After paragraph 75 insert—“75A	In paragraph 13A of Schedule 10 (detention following breach of community order)—(a) omit sub-paragraph (1);(b) in sub-paragraph (2), omit “or a young offender institution”.”(4) After paragraph 78 insert—“78A	In paragraph 16A of Schedule 16 (detention following breach of suspended sentence order)—(a) omit sub-paragraph (1);(b) in sub-paragraph (2), omit “or a young offender institution”.”
344	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)SCHEDULE 15 – Community and suspended sentence orders: drug testing requirementDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesSCHEDULE 15	Section 154COMMUNITY AND SUSPENDED SENTENCE ORDERS: DRUG TESTING REQUIREMENT1 The Sentencing Code is amended as follows.2 In section 201 (community order: community order requirements table), after the entry in the table relating to the drug rehabilitation requirement, insert—“drug testing requirement	Part 10A	section 207(3A)”.3 In section 207 (community order: availability of particular requirements), after subsection (3) insert—“Drug testing requirement(3A) A drug testing requirement is not an available requirement if the offender was convicted of the offence before the day on which section 154 of the Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 came into force.”4 In section 287 (suspended sentence order: community requirements table), after the entry in the table relating to the drug rehabilitation requirement, insert—“drug testing requirement	Part 10A	section 291(3A)”.5 In section 291 (suspended sentence order: availability of particular requirements), after subsection (3) insert—“Drug testing requirement(3A) A drug testing requirement is not an available requirement if the offender was convicted of the offence before the day on which section 154 of the Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 came into force.”
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)SCHEDULE 15 – Community and suspended sentence orders: drug testing requirement Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
345
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes6 In Schedule 9 (community orders and suspended sentence orders: requirements), after Part 10 insert—“PART 10ADRUG TESTING REQUIREMENTRequirement22A (1) In this Code, “drug testing requirement”, in relation to a relevant order, means a requirement that during a period specified in the order, the offender must, for the purpose of ascertaining whether there is any drug or psychoactive substance in the offender’s body during that period, provide samples in accordance with directions given by the responsible officer.(2) The order—(a) must provide that if the offender provides samples to a person other than the responsible officer, the results of the tests carried out on the samples are to be communicated to the responsible officer;(b) may make provision about the provision of samples by virtue of sub-paragraph (1).(3) The power of the responsible officer to give directions by virtue of sub- paragraph (1) about the provision of samples—(a) is a power to give directions as to—(i) the type of samples to be provided, and(ii) the times at which, or circumstances in which, they are to be provided,(b) is subject to any provision made by the order, and(c) is to be exercised in accordance with guidance issued by the Secretary of State.(4) The Secretary of State may revise any guidance issued under sub- paragraph (3)(c).(5) In this paragraph and paragraph 22B—  “drug” means a controlled drug as defined by section 2 of the Misuse of Drugs Act 1971;  “psychoactive substance” has the meaning given by section 2(1) of the Psychoactive Substances Act 2016.Restrictions on imposing drug testing requirement22B  (1) A court may not impose a drug testing requirement unless the following conditions are met—
346	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)SCHEDULE 16 – Detention and training orders: time to count as servedDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(a) the misuse condition, and(b) the availability of arrangements condition.(2) The misuse condition is that the court is satisfied that the offender’s misuse of a drug or psychoactive substance—(a) caused or contributed to the offence to which the order relates or an associated offence, or(b) is likely to cause or contribute to the commission of further offences by the offender.(3) The availability of arrangements condition is that the court has been notified by the Secretary of State that arrangements for implementing drug testing requirements are available in the offender’s home local justice area (and the notice has not been withdrawn).”SCHEDULE 16	Section 160DETENTION AND TRAINING ORDERS: TIME TO COUNT AS SERVEDPART 1DETENTION AND TRAINING ORDERS MADE UNDER SENTENCING CODECriminal Justice Act 2003 (c. 44)1 The Criminal Justice Act 2003 is amended as follows.2 (1) Section 240ZA (time remanded in custody to count as time served: terms of imprisonment and detention) is amended as follows.(2) In the heading, for “and detention” substitute “or detention and detention and training orders”.(3) After subsection (1) insert—“(1A) This section also applies where—(a) a court, on or after the day on which Schedule 16 to the Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 came into force, makes a detention and training order in respect of an offender for an offence, and(a) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)SCHEDULE 16 – Detention and training orders: time to count as served Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
347
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(b) the offender concerned has been remanded in custody in connection with the offence or a related offence.(1B) In this section any reference to a “sentence”, in relation to an offender, is to—(a) a term of imprisonment being served by the offender as mentioned in subsection (1)(a), or(b) a detention and training order made in respect of the offender as mentioned in subsection (1A)(a).”(4) In subsection (2), for “that purpose” substitute “the purposes of subsection (1)(b) or (1A)(b)”.(5) For subsection (9) substitute—“(8A) Subsection (9) applies in relation to an offender who is sentenced to two or more consecutive sentences or sentences which are wholly or partly concurrent if—(a) the sentences were imposed on the same occasion, or(b) where they were imposed on different occasions, the offender has not been released during the period beginning with the first and ending with the last of those occasions.(9) For the purposes of subsections (3) and (5), the sentences are to be treated as a single sentence.”3 (1) Section 240A (time remanded on bail to count towards time served: terms of imprisonment and detention) is amended as follows.(2) In the heading, for “and detention” substitute “or detention and detention and training orders”.(3) After subsection (3ZA) insert—“(3ZAA) Subsection (3ZB) also applies where—(a) a court, on or after the day on which Schedule 16 to the Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 came into force, makes a detention and training order in respect of an offender for an offence, and(b) the court has made a declaration under section 325 of the Sentencing Code specifying a credit period in relation to the order.(3ZAB) In this section any reference to a “sentence”, in relation to an offender, is to—(a) a term of imprisonment being served by the offender as mentioned in subsection (3ZA)(a), or(b) a detention and training order made in respect of the offender as mentioned in subsection (3ZAA)(a).”(4) In subsection (9)(b), omit the words from “and, in paragraph (b)” to the end.(2) 
348	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)SCHEDULE 16 – Detention and training orders: time to count as servedDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes4 In section 242 (interpretation), at the end insert—“(3) In sections 240ZA and 240A, “detention and training order” has the meaning given by section 233 of the Sentencing Code.”Sentencing Act 2020 (c. 17)5 The Sentencing Act 2020 is amended as follows.6 Omit sections 239 and 240 (effect on term of detention and training order of period on remand etc).7 In section 244 (offender subject concurrently to detention and training order and sentence of detention in a young offender institution), in subsection (2)(c), at the beginning insert “with the exception of sections 240ZA and 240A,”.8 In section 245 (offender subject concurrently to detention and training order and other sentence of detention), in subsection (2)(c), at the beginning insert “with the exception of sections 240ZA and 240A,”.1 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)SCHEDULE 16 – Detention and training orders: time to count as served Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
349
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes9 In section 325 (time on bail under certain conditions: declaration by court), in subsection (5)—(a) omit the “or” at the end of paragraph (b);(b) at the end of paragraph (c) insert “, or(d)	makes a detention and training order.”10 In section 327 (period in custody awaiting extradition: declaration by court), in subsection (2)—(a) omit the “or” at the end of paragraph (b);(b) at the end of paragraph (c) insert “, or(d)	a detention and training order.”11 In Schedule 27 (transitional provision), omit paragraph 14 (and the italic heading above it).Other enactments12 In Schedule 2 to the Criminal Appeal Act 1968 (procedural and other provisions applicable on order for retrial), in paragraph 2(4), for “and detention” substitute “or detention and detention and training orders”.1 
350	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)SCHEDULE 16 – Detention and training orders: time to count as servedDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes13 In Schedule 7 to the International Criminal Court Act 2001 (domestic provisions not applicable to ICC prisoners), in paragraph 2(1)(d), for “and detention” substitute “or detention and detention and training orders”.PART 2DETENTION AND TRAINING ORDERS MADE UNDER ARMED FORCES ACT 200614 The Armed Forces Act 2006 is amended as follows.15 In section 213 (application of provisions relating to civilian detention and training orders)—(a) in subsection (2)(a), for “sections 237 to 240” substitute “sections 237 and 238”;(b) omit subsection (3).16 After section 213 insert—“213A Period in service custody: effect on term of detention and training order(1) Subsection (2) applies where—(a) the Court Martial or the Service Civilian Court proposes to make an order under section 211 in respect of an offence, and(b) the offender has been kept in service custody in connection with the offence or any other offence the charge for which was founded on the same facts or evidence.(a) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32) SCHEDULE 17 – Youth rehabilitation orders Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
351
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(2) In determining the term of the order under section 211, the court must take account of the period for which the offender was kept in service custody.(3) If the court proposes to make two or more orders under section 211 in respect of two or more offences—(a) subsection (2) does not apply, but(b) in determining the total term of those orders, the court must take account of the total period for which the offender has been kept in service custody in connection with—(i) any of those offences, or(ii) any other offence the charge for which was founded on the same facts or evidence.(4) A period of service custody may be taken account of under this section only once.213B Period of custody awaiting extradition: effect on term of detention and training order(1) This section applies where—(a) the Court Martial or the Service Civilian Court proposes to make an order under section 211 in respect of an offence,(b) the offender was tried for the offence, or is to be sentenced—(i) after having been extradited to the United Kingdom, and(ii) without having first been restored or had an opportunity of leaving the United Kingdom, and(c) the offender was kept in custody for any period while awaiting extradition to the United Kingdom.(2) The court must—(a) specify in open court the number of days for which the offender was kept in custody while awaiting extradition, and(b) take account of those days in determining the term of the order.”SCHEDULE 17	Section 161YOUTH REHABILITATION ORDERSPART 1ELECTRONIC MONITORING: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS1 In Part 17 of Schedule 6 to the Sentencing Code (electronic monitoring requirement) after paragraph 43 insert—1 
352	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)SCHEDULE 17 – Youth rehabilitation ordersDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes“Electronic monitoring: general43A	Where a youth rehabilitation order made on or after the day on which paragraph 1 of Schedule 17 to the Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 came into force imposes an electronic monitoring requirement, the offender must (in particular)—(a) submit, as required from time to time by the responsible officer or the person responsible for the monitoring, to—(i) being fitted with, or installation of, any necessary apparatus, and(ii) inspection or repair of any apparatus fitted or installed for the purposes of the monitoring,(b) not interfere with, or with the working of, any apparatus fitted or installed for the purposes of the monitoring, and(c) take any steps required by the responsible officer, or the person responsible for the monitoring, for the purpose of keeping in working order any apparatus fitted or installed for the purposes of the monitoring.”PART 2ELECTRONIC WHEREABOUTS MONITORING REQUIREMENTSCriminal Justice and Immigration Act 2008 (c. 4)2 (1) Section 39 of the Criminal Justice and Immigration Act 2008 (youth default orders) is amended as follows.(2) In subsection (4)(a), for “electronic monitoring requirement” substitute “electronic compliance monitoring requirement”.(3) In subsection (6)—(a) in paragraph (a), after “198(3) to (5),” insert “198A,”,(b) in paragraph (b), for “, 7 and 17” substitute “and 7”, and(c) after that paragraph insert—“(ba) Part 17 of that Schedule (electronic monitoring requirements), so far as it applies to electronic compliance monitoring requirements,”.
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32) SCHEDULE 17 – Youth rehabilitation orders Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
353
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesSentencing Code3 The Sentencing Code is amended as follows.4 (1) Section 174 (youth rehabilitation requirements table) is amended as follows.(2) The existing text becomes subsection (1).(3) In that subsection, in the table—(a) in the entry relating to electronic monitoring requirements, for “electronic monitoring requirement” substitute “electronic compliance monitoring requirement”, and(b) after that entry insert—
“electronic	whereabouts	monitoring requirement(4) After that subsection insert—
Part 17
section 185(5)”.
“(2) See section 198A for provision about an electronic monitoring requirement imposed by a youth rehabilitation order made in respect of an offence of which the offender was convicted before the day on which paragraph 4 of Schedule 17 to the Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 first came into force to any extent (ignoring, for these purposes, the coming into force of Part 2 of that Schedule for the purposes of making regulations).”5 In section 175(1)(c) (meaning of youth rehabilitation order with intensive supervision and surveillance), for “electronic monitoring requirement” substitute “electronic compliance monitoring requirement”.
354	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)SCHEDULE 17 – Youth rehabilitation ordersDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes6 (1) Section 185 (youth rehabilitation order: availability of particular requirements) is amended as follows.(2) In the italic heading before subsection (4), for “requirement” substitute “requirements”.(3) In subsection (4), for “electronic monitoring requirement” substitute “electronic compliance monitoring requirement”.(4) After subsection (4) insert—“(5) An electronic whereabouts monitoring requirement is not available for a youth rehabilitation order in respect of an offence unless the offender was convicted of the offence on or after the day on which paragraph 6 of Schedule 17 to the Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 first came into force to any extent (ignoring, for these purposes, the coming into force of Part 2 of that Schedule for the purposes of making regulations).”7 In section 190 (provision of copies of youth rehabilitation order and related documents), in the table in subsection (3)—(a) in the entry relating to an electronic monitoring requirement, in the first column, for “An electronic monitoring requirement” substitute “An electronic compliance monitoring requirement”, and(b) after that entry insert—
“An	electronic	whereabouts monitoring requirement
Any person who by virtue of paragraph 46 of Schedule 6 will be responsible for the electronic monitoringAny person without whose consent the requirement could not be included in the order.”
8 After section 198 insert—1 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32) SCHEDULE 17 – Youth rehabilitation orders Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
355
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes“198A Electronic monitoring requirement previously imposed(1) This section applies where an electronic monitoring requirement was imposed by a youth rehabilitation order in respect of an offence of which the offender was convicted before the day on which paragraph 4 of Schedule 17 to the Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 first came into force to any extent (ignoring, for these purposes, the coming into force of Part 2 of that Schedule for the purposes of making regulations).(2) In this section “electronic monitoring requirement” has the meaning given by paragraph 41 of Schedule 6 as it had effect before the day mentioned in subsection (1).(3) The electronic monitoring requirement is not affected by the renaming of electronic monitoring requirements as electronic compliance monitoring requirements by that Act.(4) This Chapter applies in relation to the youth rehabilitation order as if any reference to an electronic compliance monitoring requirement were to an electronic monitoring requirement.”9 In section 395 (data from electronic monitoring: code of practice), after “electronic monitoring of offenders under” insert “—(a) electronic compliance monitoring requirements and electronic whereabouts monitoring requirements imposed by youth rehabilitation orders, and(b)”.10 In paragraph 19(3) of Schedule 6 (requirements where court imposes curfew requirement), for “electronic monitoring requirement” substitute “electronic compliance monitoring requirement”.
356	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)SCHEDULE 17 – Youth rehabilitation ordersDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes11 In paragraph 21 of Schedule 6 (requirements where court imposes exclusion requirement), for “electronic monitoring requirement” substitute “electronic compliance monitoring requirement”.12 (1) Part 17 of Schedule 6 (electronic monitoring) is amended as follows.(2) In the Part heading, omit “requirement”.(3) For the italic heading before paragraph 41 substitute “Electronic compliance monitoring requirement”.(4) In paragraph 41, for “electronic monitoring requirement” substitute “electronic compliance monitoring requirement”.(5) In the italic heading before paragraph 42, at the end insert “: electronic compliance monitoring requirement”.(6) In paragraph 42(1), for “electronic monitoring requirement” substitute “electronic compliance monitoring requirement”.(7) In the italic heading before paragraph 43, at the end insert “: electronic compliance monitoring requirement”.(8) In paragraph 43(1), for “electronic monitoring requirement” substitute “electronic compliance monitoring requirement”.(9) In the italic heading before paragraph 43A (inserted by Part 1 of this Schedule), for “Electronic monitoring” substitute “Electronic compliance monitoring requirement”.(10) In paragraph 43A(1), for “electronic monitoring requirement” substitute “electronic compliance monitoring requirement”.(11) For the italic heading before paragraph 44 substitute “Restrictions on imposing electronic compliance monitoring requirement”.(12) In paragraph 44—(a) in sub-paragraph (1)(a), for “electronic monitoring requirement” substitute “electronic compliance monitoring requirement”, and(b) in sub-paragraph (2), in the opening words, for “electronic monitoring requirement” substitute “electronic compliance monitoring requirement”.(13) After paragraph 44 insert—(2) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32) SCHEDULE 17 – Youth rehabilitation orders Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
357
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes“Electronic whereabouts monitoring requirement45 In this Code “electronic whereabouts monitoring requirement”, in relation to a youth rehabilitation order, means a requirement to submit to electronic monitoring of the offender’s whereabouts (otherwise than for the purpose of monitoring the offender’s compliance with any other requirement included in the order) during a period specified in the order.Person responsible for electronic monitoring: electronic whereabouts monitoring order46 (1) A youth rehabilitation order which imposes an electronic whereabouts monitoring requirement must include provision for making a person responsible for the monitoring.(2) The person who is made responsible for the monitoring must be of a description specified in regulations made by the Secretary of State.Electronic whereabouts monitoring requirement: general47 Where a youth rehabilitation order imposes an electronic whereabouts monitoring requirement, the offender must (in particular)—(a) submit, as required from time to time by the responsible officer or the person responsible for the monitoring, to—(i) being fitted with, or installation of, any necessary apparatus, and(ii) inspection or repair of any apparatus fitted or installed for the purposes of the monitoring,(b) not interfere with, or with the working of, any apparatus fitted or installed for the purposes of the monitoring, and(c) take any steps required by the responsible officer, or the person responsible for the monitoring, for the purpose of keeping in working order any apparatus fitted or installed for the purposes of the monitoring.Restrictions on imposing electronic whereabouts monitoring requirement48 (1) Where—(a) it is proposed to include an electronic whereabouts monitoring requirement in a youth rehabilitation order, but(b) there is a person (other than the offender) without whose co- operation it will not be practicable to secure the monitoring,the requirement may not be included in the order without that person’s consent.(2) A court may not include an electronic whereabouts monitoring requirement in a youth rehabilitation order in respect of an offender unless—(a) the court has been notified by the Secretary of State that electronic monitoring arrangements are available in the local(a) 
358	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)SCHEDULE 17 – Youth rehabilitation ordersDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesjustice area proposed to be specified in the order (and the notice has not been withdrawn),(b) the court is satisfied that—(i) the offender can be fitted with any necessary apparatus under the arrangements currently available, and(ii) any other necessary provision can be made under those arrangements, and(c) the court is satisfied that arrangements are generally operational throughout England and Wales (even if not always operational everywhere there) under which the offender’s whereabouts can be electronically monitored.”13 (1) Schedule 7 (breach, revocation or amendment of youth rehabilitation order) is amended as follows.(2) In paragraph 1(2)(b) (interpretation), for “electronic monitoring requirement” substitute “electronic compliance monitoring requirement”.(3) In paragraph 27(6) (persons to whom copy of order amending or revoking youth rehabilitation order must be given)—(a) in the entry relating to an electronic monitoring requirement, in the first column, for “An electronic monitoring requirement” substitute “An electronic compliance monitoring requirement”, and(b) after that entry insert—
“An	electronic	whereabouts monitoring requirement
Any person who by virtue of paragraph 46 of Schedule 6 will be responsible for the electronic monitoringAny person without whose consent the requirement could not be included in the order.”
14 (1) Schedule 8 (transfer of youth rehabilitation orders to Northern Ireland) is amended as follows.(2) In paragraph 5(2) (meaning of “locally based requirement”)—(2) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32) SCHEDULE 17 – Youth rehabilitation orders Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
359
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(a) in paragraph (i), for “an electronic monitoring requirement” substitute “an electronic compliance monitoring requirement”, and(b) after that paragraph insert—“(j)	an electronic whereabouts monitoring requirement.”(3) In paragraph 7 (further provisions where offender resides or will reside in Northern Ireland), in sub-paragraph (c)—(a) in paragraph (vi), for “electronic monitoring” substitute “electronic compliance monitoring”;(b) at the end insert—“(vii) paragraph 48(2) (availability of requirements for electronic whereabouts monitoring;”.(4) In paragraph 11(4) (persons to whom copy of youth rehabilitation order or amending order must be given)—(a) in the entry relating to an electronic monitoring requirement, in the first column, for “An electronic monitoring requirement” substitute “An electronic compliance monitoring requirement”, and(b) after that entry insert—
“An	electronic	whereabouts monitoring requirement
Any person who by virtue of paragraph 46 of Schedule 6 will be responsible for the electronic monitoringAny person without whose consent the requirement could not be included in the order.”

360	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)SCHEDULE 17 – Youth rehabilitation ordersDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesand Surveillance) Piloting Regulations 2023 (S.I. 2023/705), regs. 2, 3, 4(1), Sch. (with reg. 4(2)) (as amended (16.12.2024) by S.I. 2024/1355, reg. 2)I685 Sch. 17 para. 7 in force at Royal Assent for specified purposes, see s. 208(4)(r)I686 Sch. 17 para. 7 in force (temp.) at 3.7.2023 until 3.1.2026 in relation to specified areas by The Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (Youth Rehabilitation Order With Intensive Supervision and Surveillance) Piloting Regulations 2023 (S.I. 2023/705), regs. 2, 3, 4(1), Sch. (with reg. 4(2)) (as amended (16.12.2024) by S.I. 2024/1355, reg. 2)I687 Sch. 17 para. 8 in force at Royal Assent for specified purposes, see s. 208(4)(r)I688 Sch. 17 para. 8 in force (temp.) at 3.7.2023 until 3.1.2026 in relation to specified areas by The Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (Youth Rehabilitation Order With Intensive Supervision and Surveillance) Piloting Regulations 2023 (S.I. 2023/705), regs. 2, 3, 4(1), Sch. (with reg. 4(2)) (as amended (16.12.2024) by S.I. 2024/1355, reg. 2)I689 Sch. 17 para. 9 in force at Royal Assent for specified purposes, see s. 208(4)(r)I690 Sch. 17 para. 9 in force (temp.) at 3.7.2023 until 3.1.2026 in relation to specified areas by The Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (Youth Rehabilitation Order With Intensive Supervision and Surveillance) Piloting Regulations 2023 (S.I. 2023/705), regs. 2, 3, 4(1), Sch. (with reg. 4(2)) (as amended (16.12.2024) by S.I. 2024/1355, reg. 2)I691 Sch. 17 para. 10 in force at Royal Assent for specified purposes, see s. 208(4)(r)I692 Sch. 17 para. 10 in force (temp.) at 3.7.2023 until 3.1.2026 in relation to specified areas by The Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (Youth Rehabilitation Order With Intensive Supervision and Surveillance) Piloting Regulations 2023 (S.I. 2023/705), regs. 2, 3, 4(1), Sch. (with reg. 4(2)) (as amended (16.12.2024) by S.I. 2024/1355, reg. 2)I693 Sch. 17 para. 11 in force at Royal Assent for specified purposes, see s. 208(4)(r)I694 Sch. 17 para. 11 in force (temp.) at 3.7.2023 until 3.1.2026 in relation to specified areas by The Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (Youth Rehabilitation Order With Intensive Supervision and Surveillance) Piloting Regulations 2023 (S.I. 2023/705), regs. 2, 3, 4(1), Sch. (with reg. 4(2)) (as amended (16.12.2024) by S.I. 2024/1355, reg. 2)I695 Sch. 17 para. 12 in force at Royal Assent for specified purposes, see s. 208(4)(r)I696 Sch. 17 para. 12 in force (temp.) at 3.7.2023 until 3.1.2026 in relation to specified areas by The Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (Youth Rehabilitation Order With Intensive Supervision and Surveillance) Piloting Regulations 2023 (S.I. 2023/705), regs. 2, 3, 4(1), Sch. (with reg. 4(2)) (as amended (16.12.2024) by S.I. 2024/1355, reg. 2)I697 Sch. 17 para. 13 in force at Royal Assent for specified purposes, see s. 208(4)(r)I698 Sch. 17 para. 13 in force (temp.) at 3.7.2023 until 3.1.2026 in relation to specified areas by The Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (Youth Rehabilitation Order With Intensive Supervision and Surveillance) Piloting Regulations 2023 (S.I. 2023/705), regs. 2, 3, 4(1), Sch. (with reg. 4(2)) (as amended (16.12.2024) by S.I. 2024/1355, reg. 2)I699 Sch. 17 para. 14 in force at Royal Assent for specified purposes, see s. 208(4)(r)I700 Sch. 17 para. 14 in force (temp.) at 3.7.2023 until 3.1.2026 in relation to specified areas by The Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (Youth Rehabilitation Order With Intensive Supervision and Surveillance) Piloting Regulations 2023 (S.I. 2023/705), regs. 2, 3, 4(1), Sch. (with reg. 4(2)) (as amended (16.12.2024) by S.I. 2024/1355, reg. 2)PART 3INTENSIVE SUPERVISION AND SURVEILLANCE15 The Sentencing Code is amended as follows.1 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32) SCHEDULE 17 – Youth rehabilitation orders Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
361
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes16 In section 175(1) (youth rehabilitation order with intensive supervision and surveillance)—(a) omit the “and” at the end of paragraph (b), and(b) at the end of paragraph (c) insert “, and(d) in relation to an order made on or after the day on which paragraph 16 of Schedule 17 to the Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 first came into force to any extent, an electronic whereabouts monitoring requirement, unless paragraph 48 of Schedule 6 prevents such a requirement from being imposed.”17 (1) Paragraph 2 of Schedule 6 (extended activity requirement) is amended as follows.(2) In sub-paragraph (2), for “180” substitute “the relevant number”.(3) After sub-paragraph (2) insert—“(2A) In sub-paragraph (2) “the relevant number” means—(a) in relation to a youth rehabilitation order in respect of an offence of which the offender was convicted before the day on which paragraph 17 of Schedule 17 to the Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 first came into force to any extent, 180 days, and(b) in relation to a youth rehabilitation order in respect of an offence of which the offender was convicted on or after that day, 365 days.”
362	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)SCHEDULE 17 – Youth rehabilitation ordersDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesPART 4CURFEW REQUIREMENTS AND EDUCATION REQUIREMENTSIntroductory18 The Sentencing Act 2020 is amended as follows.Curfew requirement19 (1) Paragraph 18 of Schedule 6 (curfew requirement) is amended as follows.(2) In sub-paragraph (4)—(a) omit the “and” at the end of paragraph (a),(b) in paragraph (b), for “16 hours” substitute “the relevant number of hours”, and(c) at the end insert “, and(c) not more than 112 hours in any period of 7 days beginning with the day of the week on which the requirement first takes effect.”(3) After sub-paragraph (4) insert—“(4A) In sub-paragraph (4)(b), “the relevant number of hours”—(a) in relation to a youth rehabilitation order in respect of an offence of which the offender was convicted before the day on which paragraph 19 of Schedule 17 to the Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 came into force, means 16 hours, and(b) in relation to a youth rehabilitation order in respect of an offence of which the offender was convicted on or after that day, means 20 hours.”20 In paragraph 9(1) of Schedule 23 (powers to amend limits in youth rehabilitation orders)—(a) in the words before paragraph (a), for “either” substitute “any”, and(b) in paragraph (b), for “18(4)” substitute “18(4) or (4A)”.
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32) SCHEDULE 17 – Youth rehabilitation orders Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
363
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesEducation requirement21 (1) Paragraph 39 of Schedule 6 (education requirement) is amended as follows.(2) In sub-paragraph (4), for “by the time the offender ceases to be of compulsory school age” substitute “by the relevant time”.(3) After sub-paragraph (4) insert—“(4A) In sub-paragraph (4) “the relevant time” in relation to a youth rehabilitation order made in respect of—(a) an offence of which the offender was convicted before the day on which paragraph 21 of Schedule 17 to the Police, Crime,Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 came into force, or(b) an offender who, when the order was made, was not resident in England within the meaning of Part 1 of the Education and Skills Act 2008 (duty to participate in education or training after compulsory school age),means the time the offender ceases to be of compulsory school age.(4B) In sub-paragraph (4) “the relevant time” in relation to a youth rehabilitation order made in respect of—(a) an offence of which the offender was convicted on or after the day on which paragraph 21 of Schedule 17 to the Police, Crime,Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 came into force, and(b) an offender who, when the order was made, was resident in England within the meaning of Part 1 of the Education and Skills Act 2008 (duty to participate in education or training after compulsory school age),means the time at which the offender ceases to be a person to whom that Part applies or, if later, ceases to be of compulsory school age.”PART 5THE RESPONSIBLE OFFICERCriminal Justice and Immigration Act 2008 (c. 4)22 (1) The Criminal Justice and Immigration Act 2008 is amended as follows.(2) In section 4(1) (meaning of “the responsible officer”), omit paragraph (a).(2) 
364	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)SCHEDULE 18 – Variation etc of order by court in another part of the United KingdomDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(3) In section 5 (responsible officer and offender: duties in relation to the other), omit subsection (2).Sentencing Code23 (1) The Sentencing Code is amended as follows.(2) In section 191 (the responsible officer)—(a) in subsection (1), omit “(2),”;(b) omit subsection (2).(3) In section 192 (obligations of responsible officer), omit subsection (3).SCHEDULE 18	Section 183VARIATION ETC OF ORDER BY COURT IN ANOTHER PART OF THE UNITED KINGDOMPART 1VARIATION ETC OF ORDER MADE IN ENGLAND ANDWALES OR SCOTLAND BY COURT IN NORTHERN IRELANDAmendments of the Sexual Offences Act 2003 (c. 42)1 (1) Section 136ZC of the Sexual Offences Act 2003 (variation of sexual harm prevention order by court in Northern Ireland) is amended as follows.(2) In the heading, after “Variation” insert “, renewal or discharge”.(3) In subsection (2), in the words after paragraph (b), after “varying” insert “, renewing or discharging”.(4) In subsection (4)—(a) for “subsections (5) and (6)” substitute “subsections (4A) to (6B)”, and(b) after “varying” insert “, renewing or discharging”.(5) After subsection (4) insert—“(4A) In determining the application the court must have regard to—(a) the time for which the defendant is likely to remain in Northern Ireland, and(a) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)SCHEDULE 18 – Variation etc of order by court in another part of the United Kingdom Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
365
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(b) whether—(i) in the case of a sexual harm prevention order made by a court in England and Wales, the defendant is likely to return to, or to visit, England and Wales, or(ii) in the case of a sexual harm prevention order made by a court in Scotland, the defendant is likely to return to, or to visit, Scotland.”(6) In subsection (5), in the words before paragraph (a)—(a) after “An order may be” insert “renewed, or”, and(b) for “only” substitute “, only”.(7) In subsection (6), in the words before paragraph (a), after “An order as” insert “renewed or”.(8) After subsection (6) insert—“(6A) The court must not discharge a sexual harm prevention order made by a court in England and Wales before the end of 5 years beginning with the day on which the order was made without the consent of the defendant and the Chief Constable.(6B) The court must not discharge a sexual harm prevention order made by a court in Scotland, or vary such an order so as to remove a prohibition or requirement, unless the order or, as the case may be, the prohibition or requirement is no longer necessary for the purpose of—(a) protecting the public, or any particular members of the public, from sexual harm from the defendant, or(b) protecting children or vulnerable adults generally, or any particular children or vulnerable adults, from sexual harm from the defendant outside the United Kingdom.”(9) In subsection (9)—(a) in the definition of “the appropriate court”, for paragraphs (a) and (b) substitute—“(a) where the sexual harm prevention order was made—(i) in England and Wales, by the Crown Court, otherwise than on appeal from a magistrates’ court, or by the Court of Appeal, or(ii) in Scotland, by the High Court of Justiciary otherwise than on appeal,the Crown Court (in Northern Ireland);(b) where the defendant is aged 18 or over and the sexual harm prevention order was made—(i) in England and Wales, by a magistrates’ court or by the Crown Court on appeal from a magistrates’ court, or(ii) in Scotland, by the High Court of Justiciary on appeal, by the Court of Session, by the Sheriff Appeal Court or by a sheriff,any court of summary jurisdiction in Northern Ireland;”, and(b)	at the appropriate place insert—““the defendant”, in relation to a sexual harm prevention order made under section 11 or 12 of the Abusive Behaviour and Sexual Harm
366	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)SCHEDULE 18 – Variation etc of order by court in another part of the United KingdomDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(Scotland) Act 2016 (asp 22), means the person against whom the order has effect;”;““sexual harm prevention order” includes a sexual harm prevention order made under section 11 or 12 of the Abusive Behaviour and Sexual Harm (Scotland) Act 2016.”2 (1) Section 136ZD of the Sexual Offences Act 2003 (variation of sexual risk order by court in Northern Ireland) is amended as follows.(2) In the heading, after “Variation” insert “, renewal or discharge”.(3) In subsection (2), in the words after paragraph (b), after “varying” insert “, renewing or discharging”.(4) In subsection (3)—(a) for “subsections (4) and (5)” substitute “subsections (3A) to (5B)”, and(b) after “varying” insert “, renewing or discharging”.(5) After subsection (3) insert—“(3A) In determining the application the court must have regard to—(a) the time for which the defendant is likely to remain in Northern Ireland, and(b) whether—(i) in the case of a sexual risk order made by a court in England and Wales, the defendant is likely to return to, or to visit,England and Wales, or(ii) in the case of a sexual risk order made by a court in Scotland, the defendant is likely to return to, or to visit, Scotland.”(6) In subsection (4), in the words before paragraph (a)—(a) after “An order may be” insert “renewed, or”, and(b) for “only” substitute “, only”.(7) In subsection (5), in the words before paragraph (a), after “An order as” insert “renewed or”.(8) After subsection (5) insert—“(5A) The court must not discharge a sexual risk order made by a court in England and Wales before the end of 2 years beginning with the day on which the order was made without the consent of the defendant and the Chief Constable.(5B) The court must not discharge a sexual risk order made by a court in Scotland, or vary such an order so as to remove a prohibition or requirement, unless the order or, as the case may be, the prohibition or requirement is no longer necessary for the purpose of—
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)SCHEDULE 18 – Variation etc of order by court in another part of the United Kingdom Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
367
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(a) protecting the public, or any particular members of the public, from harm from the defendant, or(b) protecting children or vulnerable adults generally, or any particular children or vulnerable adults, from harm from the defendant outside the United Kingdom.”(9) In subsection (8), at the appropriate place insert—  ““the defendant”, in relation to a sexual risk order made under section 27 of the Abusive Behaviour and Sexual Harm (Scotland) Act 2016 (asp 22), means the person against whom the order has effect;”;  ““sexual risk order” includes a sexual risk order made under section 27 of the Abusive Behaviour and Sexual Harm (Scotland) Act 2016.”Amendments of the Sentencing Code3 (1) Section 351 of the Sentencing Code (variation of sexual harm prevention order by court in Northern Ireland) is amended as follows.(2) In the heading, after “Variation” insert “, renewal or discharge”.(3) In subsection (2), in the words after paragraph (b), after “varying” insert “, renewing or discharging”.(4) In subsection (5), in the words after paragraph (b)—(a) after “varying” insert “, renewing or discharging”, and(b) for “subsections (6) and (7)” substitute “subsections (5A) to (7A)”.(5) After subsection (5) insert—“(5A) In determining the application the court must have regard to—(a) the time for which the defendant is likely to remain in Northern Ireland, and(b) whether the defendant is likely to return to, or to visit, England and Wales.”(6) In subsection (6), in the words before paragraph (a)—(a) after “An order may be” insert “renewed, or”, and(b) for “only” substitute “, only”.(a) 
368	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)SCHEDULE 18 – Variation etc of order by court in another part of the United KingdomDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(7) In subsection (7), in the words before paragraph (a), after “An order as” insert “renewed or”.(8) After subsection (7) insert—“(7A) The court must not discharge an order before the end of the period of 5 years beginning with the day on which the order was made without the consent of the defendant and the Chief Constable of the Police Service of Northern Ireland.”PART 2VARIATION OF ORDER BY COURT IN SCOTLANDAmendments of the Sexual Offences Act 2003 (c. 42)4 After section 136ZD of the Sexual Offences Act 2003 insert—“136ZE Variation, renewal or discharge of sexual harm prevention order etc by court in Scotland(1) This section applies where a relevant order has been made in respect of a person who now—(a) is residing in Scotland, or(b) is in or is intending to come to Scotland.(2) In this section “relevant order” means—(a) a sexual harm prevention order,(b) a sexual offences prevention order, or(c) a foreign travel order.(3) An application may be made to the appropriate sheriff in Scotland—(a) by the defendant, or(b) by the chief constable,for an order varying, renewing or discharging the relevant order.(4) Subject to subsections (5) to (12), on the application the court, after hearing the person making the application and the other person mentioned in subsection (3) (if that person wishes to be heard), may make any order varying, renewing or discharging the relevant order that the appropriate sheriff considers appropriate.(5) In determining the application the court must have regard to—(a) the time for which the defendant is likely to remain in Scotland, and(b) whether—(a) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)SCHEDULE 18 – Variation etc of order by court in another part of the United Kingdom Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
369
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(i) in the case of a sexual harm prevention order, the defendant is likely to return to, or to visit, England and Wales, or(ii) in the case of a sexual offences prevention order or foreign travel order, the defendant is likely to return to, or to visit, Northern Ireland.(6) A sexual harm prevention order may be renewed, or varied under this section so as to impose additional prohibitions or requirements on the defendant, only if it is necessary to do so for the purpose of—(a) protecting the public in Scotland, or any particular members of the public in Scotland, from sexual harm from the defendant, or(b) protecting children or vulnerable adults generally, or any particular children or vulnerable adults, from sexual harm from the defendant outside the United Kingdom.(7) A sexual harm prevention order as renewed or varied under this section may contain only such prohibitions and requirements as are necessary for the purpose of—(a) protecting the public or any particular members of the public from sexual harm from the defendant, or(b) protecting children or vulnerable adults generally, or any particular children or vulnerable adults, from sexual harm from the defendant outside the United Kingdom.(8) A sexual offences prevention order may be renewed, or varied under this section so as to impose additional prohibitions or requirements on the defendant, only if it is necessary to do so for the purpose of protecting the public in Scotland, or any particular members of the public in Scotland, from serious sexual harm from the defendant.(9) A sexual offences prevention order as renewed or varied under this section may contain only such prohibitions and requirements as are necessary for the purpose of protecting the public or any particular members of the public from serious sexual harm from the defendant.(10) A foreign travel order may be renewed, or varied under this section so as to impose additional prohibitions on the defendant, only if it is necessary to do so for the purpose of protecting children generally or any child from serious sexual harm from the defendant outside the United Kingdom.(11) A foreign travel order as renewed or varied under this section may contain only such prohibitions as are necessary for the purpose mentioned in subsection (10).(12) The court must not discharge a sexual harm prevention order or a sexual offences prevention order before the end of 5 years beginning with the day on which the order was made without the consent of the defendant and the chief constable.(13) The defendant may appeal against the making of an order under this section, or the refusal to make such an order, as if it were a decision constituting final judgment in civil proceedings within the meaning of the Courts Reform (Scotland) Act 2014 (asp 18).(14) In this section—(1) 
370	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)SCHEDULE 18 – Variation etc of order by court in another part of the United KingdomDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes“the appropriate sheriff” means—(a) in any case, a sheriff in whose sheriffdom the defendant resides, or(b) in a case where the application is made by the chief constable—(i) a sheriff in whose sheriffdom the defendant is believed by the chief constable to be, or(ii) a sheriff to whose sheriffdom the defendant is believed by the chief constable to be intending to come;  “the chief constable” means the chief constable of the Police Service of Scotland;“child” means a person under 18;  “serious sexual harm”, in relation to the renewal or variation of a sexual offences prevention order, means serious physical or psychological harm caused by the defendant committing one or more of the offences listed in Schedule 3;  “serious sexual harm”, in relation to the renewal or variation of a foreign travel order, means serious physical or psychological harm caused by the defendant doing, outside the United Kingdom, anything which would constitute an offence listed in Schedule 3 if done in any part of the United Kingdom;  “sexual harm” and “vulnerable adult”, in relation to the renewal or variation of a sexual harm prevention order, have the meanings given by section 103B(1).136ZF Variation, renewal or discharge of sexual risk order etc by court in Scotland(1) This section applies where a relevant order has been made in respect of a person who now—(a) is residing in Scotland, or(b) is in or is intending to come to Scotland.(2) In this section “relevant order” means—(a) a sexual risk order, or(b) a risk of sexual harm order.(3) An application may be made to the appropriate sheriff in Scotland—(a) by the defendant, or(b) by the chief constable,for an order varying, renewing or discharging the relevant order.(4) Subject to subsections (5) to (10), on the application the court, after hearing the person making the application and the other person mentioned in subsection (3) (if that person wishes to be heard), may make any order varying, renewing or discharging the relevant order that the appropriate sheriff considers appropriate.(5) In determining the application the court must have regard to—(a) the time for which the defendant is likely to remain in Scotland, and(b) whether—(a) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)SCHEDULE 18 – Variation etc of order by court in another part of the United Kingdom Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
371
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(i) in the case of a sexual risk order, the defendant is likely to return to, or to visit, England and Wales, or(ii) in the case of a risk of sexual harm order, the defendant is likely to return to, or to visit, Northern Ireland.(6) A sexual risk order may be renewed, or varied under this section so as to impose additional prohibitions or requirements on the defendant, only if it is necessary to do so for the purpose of—(a) protecting the public in Scotland, or any particular members of the public in Scotland, from harm from the defendant, or(b) protecting children or vulnerable adults generally, or any particular children or vulnerable adults, from harm from the defendant outside the United Kingdom.(7) A sexual risk order as renewed or varied under this section may contain only such prohibitions and requirements as are necessary for the purpose of—(a) protecting the public or any particular members of the public from harm from the defendant, or(b) protecting children or vulnerable adults generally, or any particular children or vulnerable adults, from harm from the defendant outside the United Kingdom.(8) A risk of sexual harm order may be renewed, or varied under this section so as to impose additional prohibitions on the defendant, only if it is necessary to do so for the purpose of protecting children generally or any child from physical or psychological harm from the defendant doing acts within section 123(3).(9) A risk of sexual harm order as renewed or varied under this section may contain only such prohibitions as are necessary for the purpose mentioned in subsection (8).(10) The court must not discharge a relevant order before the end of 2 years beginning with the day on which the order was made without the consent of the defendant and the chief constable.(11) The defendant may appeal against the making of an order under this section, or the refusal to make such an order, as if it were a decision constituting final judgment in civil proceedings within the meaning of the Courts Reform (Scotland) Act 2014 (asp 18).(12) In this section—“the appropriate sheriff” means—(a) in any case, a sheriff in whose sheriffdom the defendant resides, or(b) in a case where the application is made by the chief constable—(i) a sheriff in whose sheriffdom the defendant is believed by the chief constable to be, or(ii) a sheriff to whose sheriffdom the defendant is believed by the chief constable to be intending to come;  “the chief constable” means the chief constable of the Police Service of Scotland;  
372	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)SCHEDULE 18 – Variation etc of order by court in another part of the United KingdomDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes“child”—(a) in relation to the renewal or variation of a sexual risk order, means a person under 18;(b) in relation to the renewal or variation of a risk of sexual harm order, means a person under 16;  “harm” and “vulnerable adult”, in relation to the renewal or variation of a sexual risk order, have the meanings given by section 122B(1).”Amendments of the Sentencing Code5 After section 351 of the Sentencing Code insert—“351A Variation, renewal or discharge of sexual harm prevention order by court in Scotland(1) This section applies where a sexual harm prevention order has been made in respect of an offender who—(a) is residing in Scotland, or(b) is in or intends to come to Scotland.(2) An application may be made to the appropriate sheriff in Scotland—(a) by the offender, or(b) by the chief constable,for an order varying, renewing or discharging the sexual harm prevention order.(3) Subsection (4) applies where an application under subsection (2) is made.(4) After hearing—(a) the person making the application, and(b) the other person mentioned in subsection (2) (if that person wishes to be heard),the sheriff may make any order varying, renewing or discharging the sexual harm prevention order that the sheriff considers appropriate.This is subject to subsections (5) to (8).(5) In determining the application the court must have regard to—(a) the time for which the defendant is likely to remain in Scotland, and(b) whether the defendant is likely to return to, or to visit, England and Wales.(6) An order may be renewed, or varied so as to impose additional prohibitions or requirements on the offender, only if it is necessary to do so for the purpose of—(1) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)SCHEDULE 18 – Variation etc of order by court in another part of the United Kingdom Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
373
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(a) protecting the public in Scotland, or any particular members of the public in Scotland, from sexual harm from the offender, or(b) protecting children or vulnerable adults generally, or any particular children or vulnerable adults, from sexual harm from the offender outside the United Kingdom.(7) An order as renewed or varied under this section may contain only such prohibitions and requirements as are necessary for the purpose of—(a) protecting the public or any particular members of the public from sexual harm from the offender, or(b) protecting children or vulnerable adults generally, or any particular children or vulnerable adults, from sexual harm from the offender outside the United Kingdom.(8) The court must not discharge an order before the end of the period of 5 years beginning with the day on which the order was made without the consent of the defendant and the chief constable.(9) The offender may appeal against the making of an order under this section, or the refusal to make such an order, as if it were a decision constituting final judgment in civil proceedings within the meaning of the Courts Reform (Scotland) Act 2014 (asp 18).(10) In this section—“the appropriate sheriff” means—(a) in any case, a sheriff in whose sheriffdom the offender resides, or(b) in a case where the application is made by the chief constable—(i) a sheriff in whose sheriffdom the offender is believed by the chief constable to be, or(ii) a sheriff to whose sheriffdom the offender is believed by the chief constable to be intending to come;  “the chief constable” means the chief constable of the Police Service of Scotland.”PART 3VARIATION OF ORDER BY COURT IN ENGLAND AND WALES6 After section 136ZF of the Sexual Offences Act 2003 (inserted by paragraph 4) insert—1 
374	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)SCHEDULE 18 – Variation etc of order by court in another part of the United KingdomDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes“136ZG Variation, renewal or discharge of sexual harm prevention order made in Scotland by court in England and Wales(1) This section applies where a relevant Scottish order has been made in respect of a person (“the defendant”) who now—(a) is residing in England and Wales, or(b) is in or is intending to come to England and Wales.(2) In this section “relevant Scottish order” means a sexual harm prevention order made under section 11 or 12 of the Abusive Behaviour and Sexual Harm (Scotland) Act 2016 (asp 22).(3) A person within subsection (4) may by complaint to the appropriate court apply for an order varying, renewing or discharging the relevant order.(4) Those persons are—(a) the defendant;(b) the chief officer of police for the area in which the defendant resides;(c) a chief officer of police who believes that the defendant is in, or is intending to come to, that officer’s police area.(5) If a list has been published under section 172 of the Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (list of countries where children are at high risk of sexual abuse or sexual exploitation) and has not been withdrawn, a person mentioned in subsection (4)(b) or (c) must have regard to the list in considering—(a) whether to apply for an order varying or renewing the relevant Scottish order for the purpose of protecting children generally, or any particular children, from sexual harm from the defendant outside the United Kingdom, and(b) in particular, whether to apply for an order imposing, varying or renewing a prohibition on foreign travel for that purpose.(6) Subject to subsections (7) to (14), on an application under this section the court, after hearing the person making the application and (if they wish to be heard) the other persons mentioned in subsection (4), may make any order varying, renewing or discharging the relevant Scottish order that the court considers appropriate.(7) In determining the application the court must have regard to—(a) the time for which the defendant is likely to remain in England and Wales, and(b) whether the defendant is likely to return to, or to visit, Scotland.(8) A relevant Scottish order may be renewed, or varied under this section so as to impose additional prohibitions or requirements on the defendant, only if it is necessary to do so for the purpose of—(a) protecting the public in England and Wales, or any particular members of the public in England and Wales, from sexual harm from the defendant, or(a) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)SCHEDULE 18 – Variation etc of order by court in another part of the United Kingdom Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
375
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(b) protecting children or vulnerable adults generally, or any particular children or vulnerable adults, from sexual harm from the defendant outside the United Kingdom.(9) A relevant Scottish order as renewed or varied under this section may contain only such prohibitions and requirements as are necessary for the purpose of—(a) protecting the public or any particular members of the public from sexual harm from the defendant, or(b) protecting children or vulnerable adults generally, or any particular children or vulnerable adults, from sexual harm from the defendant outside the United Kingdom.(10) If a list has been published under section 172 of the Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 and has not been withdrawn, the court must have regard to the list in considering—(a) whether any order varying or renewing the relevant Scottish order is necessary for the purpose of protecting children generally, or any particular children, from sexual harm from the defendant outside the United Kingdom, and(b) in particular, whether an order imposing, varying or renewing a prohibition on foreign travel is necessary for that purpose.(11) A relevant Scottish order may be renewed or varied under this section so as to require the defendant to submit to electronic monitoring of the defendant’s compliance with the prohibitions and requirements imposed by the order.(12) Section 103FA (electronic monitoring requirements) applies in relation to—(a) the variation under this section of a relevant Scottish order to require the defendant to submit to electronic monitoring of the defendant’s compliance with the prohibitions and requirements imposed by the order, or(b) the renewal of an order to continue such a requirement,as it applies in relation to the making of a sexual harm prevention order, subject to subsection (13).(13) In its application to the variation or renewal of a relevant Scottish order, section 103FA has effect as if—(a) the reference in subsection (4)(b) to a case where it is proposed to include in the order a requirement or provision mentioned in sub- paragraph (i) or (ii) included a case where the order already includes such a requirement or provision,(b) the reference in subsection (4)(b) to the local justice area in which the place or area proposed to be specified is situated included the local justice area in which the place or area already specified is situated, and(c) the reference in subsection (9) to section 103E were to this section.(14) The court must not discharge a relevant Scottish order, or vary such an order so as to remove a prohibition or requirement, unless the order or, as the case may be, the prohibition or requirement is no longer necessary for the purpose of—(1) 
376	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)SCHEDULE 18 – Variation etc of order by court in another part of the United KingdomDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(a) protecting the public, or any particular members of the public, from sexual harm from the defendant, or(b) protecting children or vulnerable adults generally, or any particular children or vulnerable adults, from sexual harm from the defendant outside the United Kingdom.(15) In this section—  “adult magistrates’ court” means a magistrates’ court that is not a youth court;“the appropriate court” means—(a) where the defendant is aged 18 or over, an adult magistrates’ court for the area in which the defendant resides or, where the application is made by a chief officer of police, any adult magistrates’ court acting for a local justice area that includes any part of the chief officer’s police area;(b) where the defendant is under the age of 18, a youth court for the area in which the defendant resides or, where the application is made by a chief officer of police, any youth court acting for a local justice area that includes any part of the chief officer’s police area;“child” means a person under 18;  “prohibition on foreign travel” includes a prohibition on foreign travel within the meaning of Chapter 3 of Part 2 of the Abusive Behaviour and Sexual Harm (Scotland) Act 2016 (see sections 17 and 25 of that Act);  “sexual harm” and “vulnerable adult” have the same meanings as in Chapter 3 of Part 2 of the Abusive Behaviour and Sexual Harm (Scotland) Act 2016 (see sections 10 and 25 of that Act).136ZH Variation, renewal or discharge of sexual offences prevention order or foreign travel order by court in England and Wales(1) This section applies where a relevant order has been made in respect of a person who now—(a) is residing in England and Wales, or(b) is in or is intending to come to England and Wales.(2) In this section “relevant order” means—(a) a sexual offences prevention order, or(b) a foreign travel order.(3) A person within subsection (4) may by complaint to the appropriate court apply for an order varying, renewing or discharging the relevant order.(4) Those persons are—(a) the defendant;(b) the chief officer of police for the area in which the defendant resides;(c) a chief officer of police who believes that the defendant is in, or is intending to come to, that officer’s police area.(5) If—(1) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)SCHEDULE 18 – Variation etc of order by court in another part of the United Kingdom Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
377
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(a) this section applies in relation to a person because that person is subject to a foreign travel order, and(b) a list has been published under section 172 of the Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (list of countries where children are at high risk of sexual abuse or sexual exploitation) and has not been withdrawn,a person mentioned in subsection (4)(b) or (c) must have regard to the list in considering whether to apply for an order varying or renewing the foreign travel order.(6) Subject to subsections (7) to (16), on an application under this section the court, after hearing the person making the application and (if they wish to be heard) the other persons mentioned in subsection (4), may make any order varying, renewing or discharging the relevant order that the court considers appropriate.(7) In determining the application the court must have regard to—(a) the time for which the defendant is likely to remain in England and Wales, and(b) whether the defendant is likely to return to, or to visit, Northern Ireland.(8) A sexual offences prevention order may be renewed, or varied under this section so as to impose additional prohibitions or requirements on the defendant, only if it is necessary to do so for the purpose of protecting the public in England and Wales, or any particular members of the public in England and Wales, from serious sexual harm from the defendant.(9) A sexual offences prevention order as renewed or varied under this section may contain only such prohibitions and requirements as are necessary for the purpose of protecting the public or any particular members of the public from serious sexual harm from the defendant.(10) A sexual offences prevention order may be renewed or varied under this section so as to require the defendant to submit to electronic monitoring of the defendant’s compliance with the prohibitions and requirements imposed by the order.(11) Section 103FA (electronic monitoring requirements) applies in relation to—(a) the variation under this section of a sexual offences prevention order to require the defendant to submit to electronic monitoring of the defendant’s compliance with the prohibitions and requirements imposed by the order, or(b) the renewal of an order to continue such a requirement,as it applies in relation to the making of a sexual harm prevention order, subject to subsection (12).(12) In its application to the variation or renewal of a sexual offences prevention order, section 103FA has effect as if—(a) the reference in subsection (4)(b) to a case where it is proposed to include in the order a requirement or provision mentioned in sub- paragraph (i) or (ii) included a case where the order already includes such a requirement or provision,(a) 
378	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)SCHEDULE 18 – Variation etc of order by court in another part of the United KingdomDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(b) the reference in subsection (4)(b) to the local justice area in which the place or area proposed to be specified is situated included the local justice area in which the place or area already specified is situated, and(c) the reference in subsection (9) to section 103E were to this section.(13) The court must not discharge a sexual offences prevention order before the end of 5 years beginning with the day on which the order was made without the consent of the defendant and—(a) where the application under this section is made by a chief officer of police, that chief officer, or(b) in any other case, the chief officer of police for the area in which the defendant resides.(14) A foreign travel order may be renewed, or varied under this section so as to impose additional prohibitions on the defendant, only if it is necessary to do so for the purpose of protecting children generally or any child from serious sexual harm from the defendant outside the United Kingdom.(15) A foreign travel order as renewed or varied under this section may contain only such prohibitions as are necessary for the purpose mentioned in subsection (14).(16) If a list has been published under section 172 of the Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 and has not been withdrawn, the court must have regard to the list in considering whether to renew or vary a foreign travel order under this section.(17) In this section—  “adult magistrates’ court” means a magistrates’ court that is not a youth court;“the appropriate court” means—(a) where the defendant is aged 18 or over, an adult magistrates’ court for the area in which the defendant resides or, where the application is made by a chief officer of police, any adult magistrates’ court acting for a local justice area that includes any part of the chief officer’s police area;(b) where the defendant is under the age of 18, a youth court for the area in which the defendant resides or, where the application is made by a chief officer of police, any youth court acting for a local justice area that includes any part of the chief officer’s police area;“child” means a person under 18; “serious sexual harm”—(a) in relation to the renewal or variation of a sexual offences prevention order, means serious physical or psychological harm caused by the defendant committing one or more of the offences listed in Schedule 3;(b) in relation to the renewal or variation of a foreign travel order, means serious physical or psychological harm caused by the defendant doing, outside the United Kingdom, anything which(a) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)SCHEDULE 18 – Variation etc of order by court in another part of the United Kingdom Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
379
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changeswould constitute an offence listed in Schedule 3 if done in any part of the United Kingdom.136ZI Variation, renewal or discharge of sexual risk order made in Scotland by court in England and Wales(1) This section applies where a relevant Scottish order has been made in respect of a person (“the defendant”) who now—(a) is residing in England and Wales, or(b) is in or is intending to come to England and Wales.(2) In this section “relevant Scottish order” means a sexual risk order made under section 27 of the Abusive Behaviour and Sexual Harm (Scotland) Act 2016 (asp 22).(3) A person within subsection (4) may by complaint to the appropriate court apply for an order varying, renewing or discharging the relevant Scottish order.(4) Those persons are—(a) the defendant;(b) the chief officer of police for the area in which the defendant resides;(c) a chief officer of police who believes that the defendant is in, or is intending to come to, that officer‘s police area.(5) If a list has been published under section 172 of the Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (list of countries where children are at high risk of sexual abuse or sexual exploitation) and has not been withdrawn, a person mentioned in subsection (4)(b) or (c) must have regard to the list in considering—(a) whether to apply for an order varying or renewing the relevant Scottish order for the purpose of protecting children generally, or any particular children, from sexual harm from the defendant outside the United Kingdom, and(b) in particular, whether to apply for an order imposing, varying or renewing a prohibition on foreign travel for that purpose.(6) Subject to subsections (7) to (14), on the application the court, after hearing the person making the application and (if they wish to be heard) the other persons mentioned in subsection (4), may make any order varying, renewing or discharging the relevant Scottish order that the court considers appropriate.(7) In determining the application the court must have regard to—(a) the time for which the defendant is likely to remain in England and Wales, and(b) whether the defendant is likely to return to, or to visit, Scotland.(8) A relevant Scottish order may be renewed, or varied under this section so as to impose additional prohibitions or requirements on the defendant, only if it is necessary to do so for the purpose of—(1) 
380	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)SCHEDULE 18 – Variation etc of order by court in another part of the United KingdomDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(a) protecting the public in England and Wales, or any particular members of the public in England and Wales, from harm from the defendant, or(b) protecting children or vulnerable adults generally, or any particular children or vulnerable adults, from harm from the defendant outside the United Kingdom.(9) A relevant Scottish order as renewed or varied under this section may contain only such prohibitions and requirements as are necessary for the purpose of—(a) protecting the public or any particular members of the public from harm from the defendant, or(b) protecting children or vulnerable adults generally, or any particular children or vulnerable adults, from harm from the defendant outside the United Kingdom.(10) If a list has been published under section 172 of the Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 and has not been withdrawn, the court must have regard to the list in considering—(a) whether any order varying or renewing the relevant Scottish order is necessary for the purpose of protecting children generally, or any particular children, from sexual harm from the defendant outside the United Kingdom, and(b) in particular, whether an order imposing, varying or renewing a prohibition on foreign travel is necessary for that purpose.(11) A relevant Scottish order may be renewed or varied under this section so as to require the defendant to submit to electronic monitoring of the defendant’s compliance with the prohibitions and requirements imposed by the order.(12) Section 122EA (electronic monitoring requirements) applies in relation to—(a) the variation under this section of a relevant Scottish order to require the defendant to submit to electronic monitoring of the defendant’s compliance with the prohibitions and requirements imposed by the order, or(b) the renewal of an order to continue such a requirement,as it applies in relation to the making of a sexual risk order, subject to subsection (13).(13) In its application to the variation or renewal of a relevant Scottish order, section 122EA has effect as if—(a) the reference in subsection (4)(b) to a case where it is proposed to include in the order a requirement or provision mentioned in sub- paragraph (i) or (ii) included a case where the order already includes such a requirement or provision,(b) the reference in subsection (4)(b) to the local justice area in which the place or area proposed to be specified is situated included the local justice area in which the place or area already specified is situated, and(c) the reference in subsection (9) to section 122D were to this section.(14) The court must not discharge a relevant Scottish order, or vary such an order so as to remove a prohibition or requirement, unless the order or, as the case(1) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)SCHEDULE 18 – Variation etc of order by court in another part of the United Kingdom Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
381
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesmay be, the prohibition or requirement is no longer necessary for the purpose of—(a) protecting the public, or any particular members of the public, from harm from the defendant, or(b) protecting children or vulnerable adults generally, or any particular children or vulnerable adults, from harm from the defendant outside the United Kingdom.(15) In this section—  “adult magistrates’ court” means a magistrates’ court that is not a youth court;“the appropriate court” means—(a) where the defendant is aged 18 or over, an adult magistrates’ court for the area in which the defendant resides or, where the application is made by a chief officer of police, any adult magistrates’ court acting for a local justice area that includes any part of the chief officer’s police area;(b) where the defendant is under the age of 18, a youth court for the area in which the defendant resides or, where the application is made by a chief officer of police, any youth court acting for a local justice area that includes any part of the chief officer’s police area;“child” means a person under 18;  “harm” and “vulnerable adult” have the same meanings as in Chapter 4 of Part 2 of the Abusive Behaviour and Sexual Harm (Scotland) Act 2016 (see sections 26 and 36 of that Act);  “prohibition on foreign travel” includes a prohibition on foreign travel within the meaning of Chapter 4 of Part 2 of the Abusive Behaviour and Sexual Harm (Scotland) Act 2016 (see sections 29 and 36 of that Act).136ZJ Variation, renewal or discharge of risk of sexual harm order by court in England and Wales(1) This section applies where a risk of sexual harm order has been made in respect of a person who now—(a) is residing in England and Wales, or(b) is in or is intending to come to England and Wales.(2) A person within subsection (3) may by complaint to the appropriate court apply for an order varying, renewing or discharging the order.(3) Those persons are—(a) the defendant;(b) the chief officer of police for the area in which the defendant resides;(c) a chief officer of police who believes that the defendant is in, or is intending to come to, that officer’s police area.(4) Subject to subsections (5) to (10), on the application the court, after hearing the person making the application and (if they wish to be heard) the other persons mentioned in subsection (3), may make any order varying,(1) 
382	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)SCHEDULE 18 – Variation etc of order by court in another part of the United KingdomDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesrenewing or discharging the risk of sexual harm order that the court considers appropriate.(5) A risk of sexual harm order may be renewed, or varied under this section so as to impose—(a) additional prohibitions on the defendant, or(b) requirements of the kind mentioned in subsection (7) on the defendant,only if it is necessary to do so for the purpose of protecting children generally or any child from physical or psychological harm, caused by the defendant doing acts within section 123(3).(6) A risk of sexual harm order as renewed or varied under this section may contain only—(a) such prohibitions as are necessary for the purpose mentioned in subsection (5), and(b) such requirements of the kind mentioned in subsection (7) as are necessary for that purpose.(7) A risk of sexual harm order may be renewed or varied under this section so as to require the defendant to submit to electronic monitoring of the defendant’s compliance with the prohibitions imposed by the order.(8) Section 122EA (electronic monitoring requirements) applies in relation to—(a) the variation under this section of a risk of sexual harm order to require the defendant to submit to electronic monitoring of the defendant’s compliance with the prohibitions imposed by the order, or(b) the renewal of an order to continue such a requirement,as it applies in relation to the making of a sexual harm prevention order, subject to subsection (9).(9) In its application to the variation or renewal of a risk of sexual harm order, section 122EA has effect as if—(a) subsection (4)(b)(i) were omitted,(b) the reference in subsection (4)(b) to a case where it is proposed to include in the order a provision mentioned in sub-paragraph (ii) included a case where the order already includes such a provision,(c) the reference in subsection (4)(b) to the local justice area in which the place or area proposed to be specified is situated included the local justice area in which the place or area already specified is situated, and(d) the reference in subsection (9) to section 122D were to this section.(10) The court must not discharge a risk of sexual harm order before the end of 2 years beginning with the day on which the order was made without the consent of the defendant and—(a) where the application under this section is made by a chief officer of police, that chief officer, or(b) in any other case, the chief officer of police for the area in which the defendant resides.(11) In this section—(1) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)SCHEDULE 19 – Management of terrorist offenders: provision consequential on sections 184 to 187 Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
383
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes  “adult magistrates’ court” means a magistrates’ court that is not a youth court;“the appropriate court” means—(a) where the defendant is aged 18 or over, an adult magistrates’ court for the area in which the defendant resides or, where the application is made by a chief officer of police, any adult magistrates’ court acting for a local justice area that includes any part of the chief officer’s police area;(b) where the defendant is under the age of 18, a youth court for the area in which the defendant resides or, where the application is made by a chief officer of police, any youth court acting for a local justice area that includes any part of the chief officer’s police area;“child” means a person under 16.”SCHEDULE 19	Section 188     MANAGEMENT OF TERRORIST OFFENDERS: PROVISION CONSEQUENTIAL ON SECTIONS 184 TO 187Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 (c. 60)1 (1) The Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 is amended as follows.(2) In section 51(b), after “section 41” insert “or 43B”.(3) In section 65(1), in the definition of “the terrorism provisions”, for “section 41” substitute “sections 41 and 43B”.(4) In section 118(2)(a), after “section 41” insert “or 43B”.Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)2 (1) Schedule 1 to the Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is amended as follows.(2) In Part 1, after paragraph 69B insert—“69C   The power of seizure conferred by section 43E(2) of the Terrorism Act 2000 (seizure on the occasion of a search necessary for purposes connected with protecting members of the public from a risk of terrorism).”
384	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)SCHEDULE 19 – Management of terrorist offenders: provision consequential on sections 184 to 187Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(3) In Part 2, after paragraph 82A insert—“82B   The power of seizure conferred by section 43E(2) of the Terrorism Act 2000 (seizure on the occasion of a search necessary for purposes connected with protecting members of the public from a risk of terrorism).”Counter-Terrorism Act 2008 (c. 28)3 In section 1(1) of the Counter-Terrorism Act 2008, after paragraph (bb) insert— “(bc)	section 43C(1) of that Act (search of terrorist offender released onlicence);(bd) section 43C(5) of that Act (search of vehicle in connection with search of terrorist offender released on licence);(be)  section 43D of that Act (search of premises of offender released on licence for purposes connected with protection from risk of terrorism);”.Police and Criminal Evidence (Northern Ireland) Order 1989 (S.I. 1989/1341 (N.I. 12))4 (1) The Police and Criminal Evidence (Northern Ireland) Order 1989 is amended as follows.(2) In Article 2—(a) in paragraph (2), in the definition of “the terrorism provisions”, for “section 41” substitute “sections 41 and 43B”;(b) in paragraph (3)(a), after “section 41” insert “or 43B”.(3) In Article 51(b), after “section 41” insert “or 43B”.Criminal Justice (Scotland) Act 2016 (asp 1)5 In section 59 of the Criminal Justice (Scotland) Act 2016—(a) in the heading, for “terrorism offences” substitute “cases involving terrorism”;(b) in subsection (1), after “41(1)” insert “or 43B(1)”.(a) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)SCHEDULE 20 – Further provision about video and audio links in criminal proceedings Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
385
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesSCHEDULE 20	Section 200FURTHER PROVISION ABOUT VIDEO AND AUDIO LINKS IN CRIMINAL PROCEEDINGSCriminal Justice Act 20031 (1) The Criminal Justice Act 2003 is amended as follows.(2) For section 52 substitute—“52 Further provision about the giving, variation and rescission of live-link directions(1) The power conferred by section 51 includes power to give—(a) a direction that is applicable to several, or all, of the persons taking part in particular eligible criminal proceedings;(b) a direction that is applicable to a particular person in respect of only some aspects of particular eligible criminal proceedings (such as giving evidence or attending the proceedings when not giving evidence);(c) a direction requiring or permitting a person who is outside England and Wales (whether in the United Kingdom or elsewhere) to take part in eligible criminal proceedings through a live audio link or a live video link.(2) The court may vary or rescind a direction under section 51 at any time before or during the eligible criminal proceedings to which it relates (but this does not affect the court’s power to give a further direction under that section in relation to the proceedings).(3) A direction under section 51 may not be rescinded unless—(a) the court is satisfied that it is in the interests of justice for the direction to be rescinded,(b) the parties to the proceedings have been given the opportunity to make representations, and(c) if so required by subsection (9), the relevant youth offending team has been given the opportunity to make representations.(4) In relation to the variation of a direction given under section 51—(a) so far as the effect of the variation would be to allow a person to take part in eligible criminal proceedings through a live audio link or a live video link, or to alter (without removing) a person’s ability to do so, sections 51(4) and 53(1) to (3) apply as they apply to the giving of a direction;(b) so far as the effect of the variation would be to remove a person’s ability to take part in eligible criminal proceedings through a live(a) 
386	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)SCHEDULE 20 – Further provision about video and audio links in criminal proceedingsDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesaudio link or a live video link, subsection (3) applies as it applies to the rescission of a direction.(5) Section 51(5) and (6) applies in relation to the variation or rescission of a direction given under section 51 as it applies to the giving of a direction under that section.(6) A direction under section 51 may be given, varied or rescinded—(a) on an application by a party to the proceedings, or(b) of the court’s own motion.But a party may not apply for a variation or rescission unless there has been a material change of circumstances since the direction was given or last varied.(7) The court must state in open court its reasons for refusing an application for the giving, variation or rescission of a direction under section 51 and, if it is a magistrates’ court, must cause them to be entered in the register of its proceedings.(8) If a hearing takes place in relation to the giving, variation or rescission of a direction under section 51, the court may require or permit a person to take part in that hearing through—(a) a live audio link, or(b) a live video link.(9) The requirement referred to in section 51(4)(c) and subsection (3)(c) arises in a case where—(a) the defendant is a party to the proceedings, and(b) either—(i) the defendant has not attained the age of 18 years, or(ii) the defendant has attained the age of 18 years but the court is dealing with the case as if the defendant had not attained that age.52A Further provision about the effect of live-link directions(1) A person who takes part in eligible criminal proceedings in accordance with a direction under section 51 is to be treated as complying with any requirement (however imposed or expressed) for that person to attend or appear before court, or to surrender to the custody of the court, for the purposes of that participation in those proceedings.(2) A person who takes part in eligible criminal proceedings in accordance with a direction under section 51 is to be treated as present in court for the purposes of those proceedings.(3) If eligible criminal proceedings are conducted with one or more persons taking part in accordance with a direction under section 51, the proceedings are to be regarded as taking place—(a) if at least one member of the court is taking part in the proceedings while in a courtroom, in that courtroom (or, if more than one courtroom falls within this paragraph, such of them as the court directs),(a) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)SCHEDULE 20 – Further provision about video and audio links in criminal proceedings Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
387
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(b) if no member of the court, but at least one other person, is taking part in the proceedings while in a courtroom, in that courtroom (or, if more than one courtroom falls within this paragraph, such of them as the court directs), or(c) if no person is taking part in the proceedings while in a courtroom, at such place as the court directs (being a place where the court could lawfully sit for the purposes of those proceedings).(4) In subsection (3), “courtroom” includes any place where proceedings of the sort in question might ordinarily be held (if no person were taking part in the proceedings in accordance with a direction under section 51).(5) A statement made on oath by a witness outside the United Kingdom and given in evidence through a live audio link or a live video link in accordance with a direction under section 51 is to be treated for the purposes of section 1 of the Perjury Act 1911 as having been made in the proceedings in which it is given in evidence.”(3) In section 53—(a) for the heading substitute “Further provision about live links in magistrates’ courts”;(b) in subsection (1)—(i) in the words before paragraph (a), for “This section applies” substitute “Subsections (2) and (3) apply”;(ii) in paragraph (a), for “for evidence to be given through a live link in proceedings before the court” substitute “requiring or permitting a person to take part in proceedings before the court through a live audio link or a live video link”;(iii) in paragraph (b), for “receiving such evidence” substitute “such participation”;(c) after subsection (3) insert—“(4) The following functions of a magistrates’ court may be discharged by a single justice—(a) giving a direction under section 51 or varying such a direction under section 52(2);(b) rescinding under section 52(2) a direction given under section 51 before the eligible criminal proceedings concerned begin;(c) requiring or permitting, under section 52(8), a person to take part by live audio link or live video link in a hearing about a matter within paragraph (a) or (b).”(4) In section 54(1), for “a live link” substitute “a live audio link or a live video link by a witness (including the defendant)”.(5) In section 55—(a) in subsection (2)—(i) in paragraph (a), for “51 or 52” substitute “52(6)”;(ii) in paragraph (b), for “live links” substitute “live audio links and live video links”;(b) in subsection (3)—(a) 
388	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)SCHEDULE 20 – Further provision about video and audio links in criminal proceedingsDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(i) in paragraph (a), omit “uncontested”;(ii) in paragraph (b), for “51” substitute “52(6)”;(iii) in paragraph (c), for “51 or 52” substitute “52(6)”.(6) In section 56—(a) in subsection (1)—(i) omit the definition of “legal representative”;(ii) before the definition of “local justice area” insert—““bail” includes remand to local authority accommodation in accordance with Chapter 3 of Part 3 of the Legal Aid, Sentencing and Punishment of Offenders Act 2012,“defendant” includes the person accused or convicted of an offence and, in the case of an enforcement hearing, the person liable to pay the sum or financial penalty concerned,“eligible criminal proceedings” has the meaning given in section 51(3),“enforcement hearing” means a hearing relating to collection, discharge, satisfaction or enforcement of—(a) a sum that has been adjudged to be paid on conviction for an offence by a magistrates’ court or the Crown Court, or(b) a financial penalty that is enforceable in accordance with section 85(6) and (7) of the Criminal Justice and Immigration Act 2008 as if it were such a sum (including a hearing to determine whether a financial penalty is so enforceable),“live audio link”, in relation to a person (P) taking part in proceedings, means a live telephone link or other arrangement which—(a) enables P to hear all other persons taking part in the proceedings who are not in the same location as P, and(b) enables all other persons taking part in the proceedings who are not in the same location as P to hear P,“live video link”, in relation to a person (P) taking part in proceedings, means a live television link or other arrangement which—(a) enables P to see and hear all other persons taking part in the proceedings who are not in the same location as P, and(b) enables all other persons taking part in the proceedings who are not in the same location as P to see and hear P,”;(iii) after the definition of “local justice area” insert—““preliminary hearing” means a hearing in proceedings for an offence held before the start of the trial (within the meaning of subsection (11A) or (11B) of section 22 of the Prosecution of Offences Act 1985), including, in the case of proceedings in the Crown Court, a preparatory hearing held under—(a) section 7 of the Criminal Justice Act 1987 (cases of serious or complex fraud), or(a) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)SCHEDULE 20 – Further provision about video and audio links in criminal proceedings Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
389
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(b) section 29 of the Criminal Procedure and Investigations Act 1996 (other serious, complex or lengthy cases),“relevant youth offending team” means the youth offending team (established under section 39 of the Crime and Disorder Act 1998) whose functions are exercisable in relation to the defendant concerned,“sentencing hearing” means any hearing following conviction for an offence which is held for the purpose of—(a) proceedings (in a magistrates’ court) relating to committal to the Crown Court for sentencing,(b) sentencing the offender or determining how the court should deal with the offender in respect of the offence (including reviewing, amending or revoking such a sentence or determination), or(c) determining—(i) how the offender has complied with a sentence given in respect of the offence, or(ii) how the offender should be dealt with in respect of compliance with such a sentence,and here “sentence” includes any way in which a court has determined that the offender should be dealt with in respect of the offence,”;(b) after subsection (1) insert—“(1A) In this Part, reference to taking part in proceedings means taking part in whatever capacity, including hearing the proceedings as a member of the court.(1B) In the application of this Part in relation to a witness, a reference to taking part in proceedings includes attending those proceedings for a purpose preliminary or incidental to the giving of evidence.”;(c) omit subsections (2) and (3);(d) for subsection (4) substitute—“(4) The following matters are to be disregarded for the purposes of the definitions of “live audio link” and “live video link” in subsection (1)—(a) the extent (if any) to which a person is unable to see or hear by reason of any impairment of eyesight or hearing;(b) the effect of any direction or order which provides for one person taking part in proceedings to be prevented by means of a screen or other arrangement from seeing another person taking part in the proceedings.”(a) 
390	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)SCHEDULE 20 – Further provision about video and audio links in criminal proceedingsDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesExtradition Act 20032 (1) The Extradition Act 2003 is amended as follows.(2) In section 206A—(a) in the heading, omit “certain”;(b) in subsection (1)—(i) in paragraph (a), omit the words from “other” to “56,”;(ii) in paragraph (b), omit the words from “, other” to the end;(c) in subsection (2)—(i) for the words from “the person” to “during the hearing,” substitute “it is in the interests of justice to do so,”;(ii) omit “at any time before the hearing”;(d) for subsection (3) substitute—“(3) A live link direction is a direction requiring a person to take part in the hearing (in whatever capacity) through a live link.”;(e) omit subsection (5);(f) for subsection (6) substitute—“(6) A person who takes part in the hearing through a live link is to be treated as present in court for the purposes of the hearing.”(3) In section 206C—(a) omit subsections (4) and (5);(b) in subsection (6)—(i) in the opening words, for “, while absent from the place where the hearing is being held,” substitute “(P)”;(ii) in paragraph (a), for the words from “the appropriate” to the end substitute “all other persons taking part in the hearing who are not in the same location as P, and”;(iii) in paragraph (b), for the words from “the judge” to the end substitute “all other persons taking part in the hearing who are not in the same location as P.”;(iv) omit the words after paragraph (b);(c) after subsection (6) insert—“(7) For the purposes of subsection (6) the following matters are to be disregarded—(a) the extent (if any) to which a person is unable to see or hear by reason of any impairment of eyesight or hearing;(b) the effect of any direction or order which provides for one person taking part in a hearing to be prevented by means of a screen or other arrangement from seeing another person taking part in the hearing.”(a) 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)SCHEDULE 20 – Further provision about video and audio links in criminal proceedings Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
391
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesConsequential amendments of other enactments3 (1) The Criminal Appeal Act 1968 is amended as follows.(2) In section 22, omit subsections (4) to (6).(3) In section 23, omit subsection (5).(4) In section 31—(a) in subsection (1), after paragraph (a) insert—“(aza) the powers under sections 51 and 52 of the Criminal Justice Act 2003 as they are exercisable in relation to appeals to the criminal division of the Court of Appeal and preliminary and incidental proceedings;”;(b) in subsection (2), omit paragraph (ca).(5) In section 31A—(a) in the heading, omit “under Part 1”;(b) in subsection (2), omit paragraph (aa);(c) after subsection (2) insert—“(2A) The registrar may exercise the powers under sections 51 and 52 of the Criminal Justice Act 2003 as they are exercisable in relation to appeals to the criminal division of the Court of Appeal and preliminary and incidental proceedings.”;(d) in subsection (4), after “subsection (2)” insert “or (2A)”.4 (1) The Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 is amended as follows.(2) In section 46ZA(3)—(a) in paragraph (b)—(i) for the words from “proceedings” to “person” substitute “the proceedings referred to in section 47(3)(b)(i)”;(ii) for “that section” substitute “those proceedings”;(b) in paragraph (d), for “such a direction” substitute “a direction of the sort referred to in section 47(3)(b)(ii)”.(3) In section 46A(1ZA)(b), for the word from “proceedings” to the end substitute “the proceedings referred to in sub-paragraph (i) of that provision”.(4) In section 47(3)(b), for sub-paragraphs (i) and (ii) substitute—“(i) proceedings held for the purposes of section 51 of the Criminal Justice Act 2003 (directions for live links in criminal proceedings) so far as that section applies to preliminary hearings (within the meaning of that section), and(ii) any such hearing in relation to which a direction under that section is given requiring or permitting the person on bail
392	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)SCHEDULE 20 – Further provision about video and audio links in criminal proceedingsDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesto take part through a live audio link or a live video link (within the meaning of that section);”.5 In section 32 of the Criminal Justice Act 1988—(a) in the heading, at the end insert “when witness abroad: service courts”;(b) before subsection (1) insert—“(A1) This section applies only so far as provided by an order under paragraph 8 of Schedule 13.”6 (1) The Youth Justice and Criminal Evidence Act 1999 is amended as follows.(2) In Part 2, in the heading of Chapter 1A, at the end insert “: service courts”.(3) In section 33A (use of live links for evidence of the accused), in subsection (1), for the words from “any” to the end substitute “proceedings in a service court against a person for an offence, if and so far as provided by an order under section 61(1).”7 (1) In section 29 of the Crime (International Co-operation) Act 2003—(a) in the heading, for “television” substitute “video or audio”;(b) in subsection (1), for the words from “section 32(1A)” to “apply” substitute “section 51 of the Criminal Justice Act 2003 (live links in criminal proceedings) to apply in relation to witnesses who are outside the United Kingdom”.(2) The Evidence Through Television Links (England and Wales) Order 2013 (S.I. 2013/1598) is revoked.8 In the Sentencing Code, omit section 391.1 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)SCHEDULE 21 – Minor amendments in relation to the sentencing consolidation Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
393
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes9 In section 26 of the Domestic Abuse Act 2021 (breach of domestic abuse protection notice), for subsection (8) substitute—“(8) The requirement in subsection (2) to bring a person before the court is satisfied if the person appears before the court through a live video link or live audio link (within the meaning given by section 56 of the Criminal Justice Act 2003).”SCHEDULE 21	Section 204MINOR AMENDMENTS IN RELATION TO THE SENTENCING CONSOLIDATIONPART 1AMENDMENTS TO THE SENTENCING ACT 20201 The Sentencing Act 2020 is amended as follows.2 In section 108(4), for “Part” substitute “Chapter”.3 In the table in section 122(1) (standard scale of fines for summary offences)—(a) in the heading of the second column, for “1 October 1992” substitute “1 May 1984”;(b) between the second and third columns, insert—“Offence committed on or after 1 May 1984 and before 1 October 1992£50£100
394	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)SCHEDULE 21 – Minor amendments in relation to the sentencing consolidationDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes“Offence committed on or after 1 May 1984 and before 1 October 1992£400£1,000£2,000”4 In section 166(7), for “paragraph” substitute “entry”.5 In section 293(2)(d), for “(“a progress report”) substitute “(a “progress report”)”.6 In section 414(6), in each of paragraphs (a) and (b), for “by the Armed Forces Act 2006” substitute “by or under the Armed Forces Act 2006”.7 (1) Schedule 5 is amended as follows.(2) In paragraph 7(2)(b), after “before a youth court” insert “or, if the offender is aged 18 or over, a magistrates’ court other than a youth court.”(3) In paragraph 9—(a) in sub-paragraph (1), after “a youth court” insert “or other magistrates’ court”;(b) in sub-paragraph (6), for “youth court” substitute “magistrates’ court”.8 In Schedule 16, in paragraph 11(4)(b), for first “by” substitute “be”.9 In Schedule 21, in paragraph 4(1)—1 
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)SCHEDULE 21 – Minor amendments in relation to the sentencing consolidation Document Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
395
Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(a) omit the word “and” at the end of paragraph (b);(b) at the end of paragraph (c) insert “and”.10 (1) Schedule 22 is amended as follows.(2) In paragraph 27—(a) in sub-paragraph (1)(b), in the inserted paragraph (aa), after “Schedule 22” insert “to the Sentencing Act 2020”.(b) in sub-paragraph (3), after “Schedule 22” insert “to the Sentencing Act 2020”.(3) In paragraph 34, in the opening words, for “omit” substitute “in”.(4) In paragraph 43—(a) the words from “, in subsection (2)” to the end become sub-paragraph (a);(b) after that sub-paragraph insert—“(b)	in subsection (3), at the beginning insert “If the offender was aged 21 or over when convicted,”.11 In Schedule 24, omit paragraph 154(f).PART 2AMENDMENTS TO OTHER ENACTMENTSCriminal Justice Act 2003 (c. 44)12 In section 237(1B) of the Criminal Justice Act 2003, after paragraph (a) insert— “(aa)	references to a sentence of detention under section 262 of theSentencing Code include a sentence of detention in a young offenderinstitution under section 210B of the Armed Forces Act 2006;”.
396	Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32)SCHEDULE 21 – Minor amendments in relation to the sentencing consolidationDocument Generated: 2025-01-31Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 31 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesCounter-Terrorism and Sentencing Act 2021 (c. 11)13 In Schedule 13 to the Counter-Terrorism and Sentencing Act 2021, omit paragraph 44.
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32) Document Generated: 2025-01-31
397

Home  Crime, justice and law  Crime preventionCollectionSerious Crime Act 2015This page contains an overview of the Serious Crime Act and supporting documents.From: Home O?cePublished 6 June 2014Last updated 4 March 2015 — See all updatesRelated contentSerious Crime Bill: Proceeds of crimeSerious Crime Bill: Organised, serious and g ang -related crimeSerious Crime Bill: Protection of children and miscellaneousSerious Crime Bill: Computer misuse Serious Crime Bill: Drug -cutting agentsThe Serious Crime Act received Royal Assent on 3 March 2015.The act gives e?ect to a number of proposals set out in the Serious and Organised Crime Strategy. It builds on the current criminal and civil law to ensure that the National Crime Agency, the police and other law enforcement agencies can continue e?ectively and relentlessly to pursue, disrupt and bring to justice serious and organised criminals.The act also introduces measures to enhance the protection of vulnerable children and others, including by strengthening the law to tackle female genital mutilation (FGM) and domestic abuse. The act also includes provisions to tighten prison security and to guard against the threat of terrorism.The act: improves our ability to recover criminal assets by amending the Proceeds of Crime Act 2002 amends the Computer Misuse Act 1990 to ensure sentences for attacks on computer systems fully reflect the damage they cause creates a new o?ence targeting people who knowingly participate in an organised crime group extends the scope of serious crime prevention orders and gang injunctions  creates new powers to seize, detain and destroy chemical substancessuspected of being used as cutting agents for illegal drugs clarifies the o?ence of child cruelty in section 1 of the Children and Young Persons Act 1933, making it explicit that the o?ence covers cruelty which causes psychological su?ering or injury as well as physical harm replaces anachronisticreferences to child prostitution and child pornography in the Sexual O?ences Act 2003 restricts the o?ence of loitering or soliciting for the purposes of prostitution to adults introduces a new o?ence of sexual communication with a child creates a new o?ence making it illegal to possess paedophile manuals  criminalises patterns of repeated or continuous coercive or controllingbehaviour against an intimate partner or family member strengthens prison security by creating new o?ences of unauthorised possession of a knife or other o?ensive weapon in prison and throwing articles into a prison gives courts the power to make mobile network operators disconnect mobile communication devices being used in prison without authorisation allows people suspected of committing an o?ence overseas under sections 5 (preparation of terrorism acts) or 6 (training for terrorism) of the Terrorism Act 2006 to be prosecuted in the UKHow the act will help stop FGMTo help stop FGM and protect victims, the act: extends the extra-territorial reach of the o?ences in the Female Genital Mutilation Act 2003 so that they apply to habitual as well as permanent UK residents introduces a new o?ence of failing to protect a girl from risk of FGM  grants lifelong anonymity to victims brings in a civil order (FGM protection orders) to protect potential victims introduces a duty on healthcare professionals, teachers and social care workers, to notify the police of known cases of FGM carried out on a girl under 18Where can I find more information?The Serious Crime Act and the accompanying explanatory notes are available on the Parliament website.You can also read the Telecommunications Restriction Orders Regulations and impact assessment.Related documents can be found below.Related documentsSerious Crime Bill: related documents17 February 2016 Policy paperSerious Crime Bill: Proceeds of crime24 March 2015 Policy paperSerious Crime Bill: Computer misuse24 March 2015 Policy paperSerious Crime Bill: Organised, serious and gang-related crime1 June 2015 Policy paperSerious Crime Bill: Drug-cutting agents24 March 2015 Policy paperSerious Crime Bill: Protection of children and miscellaneous18 May 2015 Policy paperAnnouncementsSerious Crime Bill receives Royal Assent3 March 2015 News storyIllegal mobile phones in prisons to be cut o?11 August 2016 Press releaseCircularsCircular 008/2015: Serious Crime Act 201525 March 2015 CorrespondenceCircular 020/2015: amendments to the Proceeds of Crime Act 200227 May 2015 CorrespondenceConsultationsReporting and acting on child abuse and neglect21 July 2016 Consultation outcomeGuidanceInjunctions to prevent gang-related violence and drug dealing26 May 2016 Statutory guidanceCode of Practice Issued Under the Proceeds of Crime Act 200210 June 2016 GuidanceMandatory reporting of female genital mutilation: procedural information22 January 2020 GuidancePublished 6 June 2014Last updated 4 March 2015 + show all updatesExplore the topicCrime preventionServices and informationGovernment activityBenefitsEducation and learningDepartmentsBirths, death, marriages and careEmploying peopleNewsBusiness and self-employedEnvironment and countrysideGuidance and regulationChildcare and parentingHousing and local servicesResearch and statisticsCitizenship and living in the UKMoney and taxPolicy papers and consultationsCrime, justice and the lawPassports, travel and living abroadTransparencyDisabled peopleVisas and immigrationHow government worksDriving and transportWorking , jobs and pensionsGet involved
Serious Crime BillDelegated Powers – Supplementary Memorandum by the Home OfficeThe Government has tabled further amendments to the Serious Crime Bill for Commons Committee stage; these include two new delegated power. This supplementary memorandum explains why the powers have been taken and the reason for the procedure selected.New clause “Guidance”: Power to issue guidance in relation to newoffence of controlling relationshipsorcoercive behaviour in intimate or familyPower conferred on:Secretary of StatePower exercisable by:Statutory GuidanceParliamentary procedureNone1. New clause “Controlling or coercive behaviour in an intimate or family relationship”, which extends to England and Wales, provides for a new domestic abuse offence. That new clause sets out the elements of the new offence. In appropriate cases certain terms used in the construction of the offence are defined in the legislation, for example the term “members of the same family”, while others, such as “controlling or coercive” are left undefined and will take their ordinary meaning. In the normal way, it will be a matter for a jury or magistrates to determine whether, on the facts of a particular case, the offence has been made out. That said, the Government sees the merit in providing guidance to the police to accompany the new offence to assist police forces in understanding and investigating the new offence, and in giving statutory underpinning to such guidance. Statutory guidance is also expected to be of value to third sector organisations and others working in the field of domestic abuse. Accordingly, new clause “Guidance” confers a power on the Secretary of State to issue guidance to whatever persons she considers appropriate concerning the investigation of the new offence. This is accompanied by a power to revise any guidance which is issued, and a duty to arrange for any guidance that is issued or revised to be published. Amongst other things, such guidance would provide examples of the kind of behaviours that might be considered to be controlling or coercive when the offence is being investigated.2. Any guidance issued under the new clause will not be subject to any parliamentary scrutiny, on the grounds that it will be worked up in consultation with all interested stakeholders and practitioners. The guidance will not conflict with, or alter the scope of, the new criminal offence, which will itself be the subject of parliamentary scrutiny during the parliamentary passage of this Bill. And finally, new clause “Guidance” does not impose any obligation on any named public authorities or individuals to follow the new statutory guidance. The approach taken in the new clause is consistent with other1. 
legislative provisions providing for statutory guidance, for example, section 63Q of the Family Law Act 1996 in relation to forced marriage and sections 19, 32, 41, 56, 73 and 91 of the Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 in respect of powers for tackling anti-social behaviour.New clause “Prevention or restriction of use of communication devices by prisoners etc”: Power to make regulations conferring power on a court to order a communications provider to disconnect a mobile phone in use in prison without authorisationPower conferred on:	The Secretary of State and the Scottish MinistersPower exercisable by:	Regulations made by statutory instrument Parliamentary procedure:	Affirmative3. New clause “Prevention or restriction of use of communication devices by prisoners etc” confers on the Secretary of State (in relation to England and Wales) and the Scottish Ministers (in relation to Scotland) a power to make provision by regulations conferring power on a court to make a “telecommunications restriction order”. This is an order which will require a communications provider to take whatever action the order specifies for the purpose of preventing or restricting the use of a mobile phone (or other communications device) in a prison where the use of the phone is unauthorised. The new clause sets out what regulations must make provision about (subsection (3)) and what they may make provision about (subsection(4)). It also defines certain terms, such as “communications provider” (subsection (8)).4. Mobile phones in prisons are associated with numerous crimes, including the illicit supply of drugs and other organised crime. There are a number of offences relating to the use of mobile phones in prisons without authorisation. These can be found in the Prison Act 1952 (for England and Wales). Similar offences exist for Scotland. Section 40D(1) of the Prison Act 1952 creates the offence of taking a photograph or making sound recordings in a prison or transmitting any image or sound by electronic communications. Section 40D(3) creates offences designed to prohibit the conveyance or transmission of restricted documents out of a prison. Section 40D(3A) creates an offence in relation to the possession of, inter alia, a mobile phone, without authorisation.5. ‘Authorisation’ for the purposes of section 40D of the Prison Act 1952 is defined in section 40E of that Act and means authorisation given for the purposes of that section in relation to all prisons or prisons of a specified description, by prison rules or by the Secretary of State; and in relation to a particular prison—ï by the Secretary of State;ï by the governor or director of the prison;ï 
ï by a person working at the prison who is authorised by the governor or director to grant authorisation on his behalf.6. The Prisons Rules 1999 provide for powers of confiscation of unauthorised articles:‘43(5) The governor may confiscate any unauthorised article found in the possession of a prisoner after his reception into prison, or concealed or deposited anywhere within a prison.’.7. Detection technology and cell and prisoner searches are currently used to identify and seize phones in prison. However, many of the phones in question are not found resulting in few prosecutions and relatively few confiscations.8. Although communications providers may be able to disconnect the phones in question in accordance with the terms and conditions attached to usage, this is not certain. Consequently, the Government considers it necessary to make bespoke provision via regulations where a court can order the communications provider to disconnect the phone.9. The Government considers that it is appropriate to put the detail pertaining to this measure into regulations, since some of it will necessarily be technical in nature. As technology evolves, and new equipment becomes available, it may for instance be necessary to update the detection to disconnection process. Technology has a limited lifespan and therefore, by including technical details about the process in regulations as opposed to on the face of the Bill, we are better placed to amend if required. Further, given that technology changes rapidly and that therefore it may be necessary to modify the provisions accordingly, it is more practicable to do this via secondary legislation. That said, whilst the scheme is to be set out in secondary legislation, the purpose of the scheme, namely to confer a power on the civil courts to require communication providers to take specified action to prevent or restrict the use of mobile phones by prisoners, is clearly set out on the face of the new clause (subsections (1) and (2)). Moreover, the new clause requires that any regulations must include certain core elements of the scheme (subsection (3)), including key safeguards in respect of rights to make representations and provision about appeals. Subsection (4) sets out matters about which the regulations may make provision.10. Given that the scheme itself is to be set out in secondary legislation, and in order to ensure that the rights of those affected are fully considered, the Government considers that it is appropriate for the regulations to be subject to the affirmative procedure thereby ensuring that the details of the scheme must be debated and approved by both Houses (or, in Scotland, by the Scottish Parliament).Home Office8 January 2015
24/03/2025  Social needs and media considerationshttps://www.college.police.uk/app/civil-emergencies/disaster-victim-identification/social-needs-and- media-considerations
Page
Social needs and media considerationsThis page is from APP, the official source of professional practice for policing. First published23 October 2013 Updated7 February 2025Written by College of Policing Disaster victim identification 3 mins readFaith communitiesThe deceased and their family and friends may be from any number of nationalities, cultural groups or faiths, or have no faith. Do not make assumptions about the religious or cultural beliefs or views of people. Where possible and appropriate, ask family and friends in a sensitive manner about their beliefs and cultures as well as those of the deceased.Consider people's cultural and faith needs and requirements at all times, and provide explanation when the nature of emergencies and major incidents are such that it may not be possible to meet individuals’ wishes in the early phases of an incident. As progress is made through the response phases of an incident, it becomes more likely that cultural and faith requirements can be identified and taken into account. Consider these needs, requirements and implications for communication at every stage when dealing with deceased people, their families, and friends.A range of personnel are available to support the police in ensuring that cultural and faith issues are addressed appropriately during major incidents. Consult police diversity managers and officers, and make use of their networks of key community leaders or faith leaders. Faith groups and faith leaders do not always represent the whole community, so consider the diverse needs of all members of all faiths and cultures as far as practical and possible.Independent advisory groups
The purpose of an independent advisory group (IAG) is to give the community a voice in police decision- making; they can also provide advice on developing successful partnerships. They will make observations both within the force and to the communities they represent. This includes helping to address problems affecting particular groups or communities.Effective and well-structured IAGs will enable gathering of a range of community views. For further information see the independent advisory group's advice and guidance.Communications and social media strategyMass media, and in particular social media, is used increasingly by the public to report emergencies, call for help and share information (including misinformation and dis-information). There is an expectation that the police and other agencies will be actively engaged in using the latest technologies to create, manage and respondto information demands. The increased use of smartphones and social media platforms means that first reports of an incident appear increasingly often on social media. It is therefore important to be prepared to deliver two- way, real-time channels of communication where appropriate, and have a well-developed and well-coordinated media strategy ready to implement.A well-informed public is better able to respond to an emergency, whilst minimising the impact to the affected community. By informing the public (and staff) as best they can, all organisations may build their trust. This includes avoiding alarming the public unnecessarily.For further information, see social media in emergency situations. Back to Disaster victim identification overviewTagsCivil emergencies
Home  Employing people  Dismissing sta? and redundanciesSolve a workplace dispute
OverviewProblems with your employer usually fall into one of two categories: grievances - when you raise your concerns, problems or complaints with your employer disciplinaries - when your employer has concerns about your work, conduct or absenceExplain your concern to your manager to see if you can sort out any problems informally. You may find it helpful to suggest what you would like them to do to solve your problem.Your employer should discuss any disciplinary issues with you informally first. These issues could lead to formal disciplinary action, including dismissal in more serious or repetitive cases.Right to be accompaniedYou have the right to be accompanied to grievance or disciplinary meetings (and any appeals) by either a:  colleague or trade union representative family member or Citizens Advice Bureau worker if this allowed - check your employment contract, company handbook or human resources intranet site
Related contentJoining a trade unionMake a claim to an employment tribunal
 NextFormal proceduresView a printable version of the whole guideExplore the topicYour rights and legal support Dismissing sta? and redundanciesRedundancies, dismissals and disciplinariesServices and informationGovernment activityBenefitsEducation and learningDepartmentsBirths, death, marriages and careEmploying peopleNewsBusiness and self-employedEnvironment and countrysideGuidance and regulationChildcare and parentingHousing and local servicesResearch and statisticsCitizenship and living in the UKMoney and taxPolicy papers and consultationsCrime, justice and the lawPassports, travel and living abroadTransparencyDisabled peopleVisas and immigrationHow government worksDriving and transportWorking, jobs and pensionsGet involved
24/03/2025  Specialist resourceshttps://www.college.police.uk/app/civil-emergencies/civil-contingencies/specialist-resources PageSpecialist resourcesThis page is from APP, the official source of professional practice for policing. First published23 October 2013 Updated3 April 2024Written by College of Policing Civil contingencies9 mins readThis section provides guidance on the specialist resources and capabilities that may be involved or activated during a major incident.For further information, see Chapter 3 of the Emergency Response and Recovery guidance. This outlines the roles and responsibilities of the main agencies and sectors that are likely to become engaged in the response to, and recovery from, emergencies at the local level.Further information on major incidents that involve fatalities can be found in the sections on Incidents involving fatalities, Casualty Bureau (which can apply both with and without fatalities) and Excess death.Fire and rescue servicesThe primary areas of fire and rescue responsibility at a major incident are:  the saving of life through search and rescue firefighting and fire prevention  rendering humanitarian services detection, identification, monitoring and management of hazardous materials (HAZMAT) and protecting the environment provision of qualified scientific advice in relation to HAZMAT incidents via their scientific advisors  salvage and damage control safety management within the inner cordon to maintain emergency service cover throughout and return to a state of normality at the earliest time
The primary areas of ambulance service responsibility at a major incident are to:  save life together with the other emergency services provide treatment, stabilisation and care of casualties at the scene provide appropriate transport, medical staff, equipment and resources establish an effective triage sieve and sort system, prioritising the needs and evacuation requirements of the injured and establish a safe location for casualty clearing provide a focal point at the incident for all National Health Service (NHS) and other medical resources  nominate and alert receiving hospitals for the injured and inform other agencies arrange the most appropriate means of transporting the injured to hospitals maintain emergency cover throughout the local ambulance service area and return to a state of normality at the earliest time act as a portal into the wider health services including UK Health Security Agency (formerly Public Health England)National interagency liaison officers (NILOs)National interagency liaison officers (NILOs) are security vetted, trained and identifiable emergency responders from the fire and rescue service, ambulance service, HM Coastguard, military and police.They may operate in either a command, tactical advisor or service specific role. They can support pre-planned or spontaneous operations at strategic, tactical and operational levels, including facilitating interoperable working with partner agencies.Hazardous area response team (HART)Hazardous area response teams (HART) are specially recruited and trained personnel, equipped to provide the ambulance response to high-risk environments and complex emergency situations.HARTs are based in each NHS Trust in England and Wales, providing cover across the whole of the each country. In some cases they may work together on specific, large scale or high-profile incidents, either accidental or deliberately caused.HARTs work alongside the police and fire and rescue services within the inner cordon (or ‘hot zone’) of a major incident. The job of the HART is to triage and treat casualties and to help save lives in very difficult circumstances.They are also there to look after other emergency personnel who may become injured while attending these difficult and challenging incidents.
Urban search and rescue (USAR) are a functional support sector for the fire and rescue service. USAR respond to incidents involving unstable and collapsed structures resulting from deliberate or accidental causes. They search, detect, locate and rescue trapped casualties and support the recovery of the deceased. This includes working in environments that are difficult to access such as underground, in restricted spaces or at heights. They also respond to serious transportation incidents involving trains, trams and aircraft.Within these challenging environments, USAR teams have various specialised methods and an array of equipment allowing them to conduct: technical searches breaking and breaching  lifting and moving    propping and shoring to stabilise structures and prevent further collapse Their capability in England and Wales includes: fully trained responders  prime movers equipment modules national tactical advisors canine search capability within each USAR zoneThe National Fire Chiefs Council and the National Police Chiefs’ Council have a memorandum of understanding to support policing in mass fatality incidents.Back to Civil contingencies overviewTagsCivil emergencies
Statutory GuidanceInjunctions to Prevent Gang-Related Violence and Gang-Related Drug DealingRevised GuidanceMay 2016
Statutory GuidanceInjunctions to Prevent Gang-Related Violence and Gang-Related Drug DealingRevised GuidancePresented to Parliament pursuant to section 47(4) of the Policing and Crime Act 2009May 2016
© Crown copyright 2016This publication is licensed under the terms of the Open Government Licence v3.0 except where otherwise stated. To view this licence, visit nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government- licence/version/3 or write to the Information Policy Team, The National Archives, Kew, London TW9 4DU, or email: psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk.Where we have identified any third party copyright information you will need to obtain permission from the copyright holders concerned.This publication is available at www.gov.uk/government/publicationsAny enquiries regarding this publication should be sent to us at SeriousYouthViolence@homeoffice.gsi.gov.uk.Print ISBN 9781474132954Web ISBN 9781474132961ID 16051601 05/16Printed on paper containing 75% recycled fibre content minimum.Printed in the UK by the Williams Lea Group on behalf of the Controller of Her Majesty’s Stationery Office
Statutory Guidance Injunctions to Prevent Gang-Related Violence and Gang-Related Drug DealingContents1. Introduction	51.1. Background	51.2. Terminology used in the guidance	51.3. Purpose of the guidance	52. Gang injunctions: the basics	72.1. What are gang injunctions?	72.2. What is gang-related violence?	72.3. What is gang-related drug dealing?	82.4. Which groups are not suitable for gang injunctions?	82.5. Who can apply for a gang injunction?	82.6. How do ‘with notice’ and ‘without notice’ applications differ?	82.7. What prohibitions and requirements can gang injunctions impose?	92.8. How do gang injunctions fit with other measures to tackle gangs?	93. Young people and gangs	103.1. Young people’s involvement in gangs	103.2. Issues to consider when applying for a gang injunction against a respondentbetween the ages of 14 and 17	104. Women, girls and gangs	124.1. Women and girls’ involvement in gangs	124.2. Issues to consider when applying for a gang injunction against a female respondent	125. The secure estate	145.1. The impact of an injunction on the secure estate	146. Consultation	156.1. Consultation requirement for ‘with notice’ applications	156.2. Consultation requirement and ‘without notice’ applications	166.3. Managing the consultation process	166.3.1. Risk assessment	166.3.2. Promoting access to health and social care services	176.3.3. Confidentiality	177. Evidence gathering	187.1. Obtaining and reviewing evidence – general principles	187.2. Evidence for ‘with notice’ hearings	187.3. Evidence for ‘without notice’ hearings	191
Statutory Guidance Injunctions to Prevent Gang-Related Violence and Gang-Related Drug Dealing7.4. Admissible forms of evidence	197.5. Hearsay evidence	207.6. Police and Local Authority intelligence	207.7. Standard of proof	218.Drafting the terms of the proposed injunction228.1.	Length of prohibitions228.2.	Examples of prohibitions238.2.1.	Non-association238.2.2.	Exclusion zones238.2.3.	Dangerous dogs and other animals248.2.4.	The use of the internet and other technologies248.3.	Requirements248.3.1.	Positive requirements258.4.	Power of arrest259.Applying for Injunctions279.1.	‘Without notice’ hearings279.2.	‘With notice’ hearings279.3.	The process of applying for an injunction289.3.1.	Documents to be provided to the court289.3.2.	Fee to be paid299.3.3.	How to prepare a court file for an application299.4.	Courts to which an application may be made309.5.	Courts at which an application may be heard: security considerations329.6.	Witness care329.7.	Disclosure349.7.1.	Access to court documents349.7.2.	Reporting restrictions349.7.3.	Public Interest Immunity applications359.8.	Legal aid for respondents3510.Serving the injunction3610.1. Serving the injunction on the respondent3610.2. Inputting information into the Police National Computer (PNC)3711.Variation, discharge and review of injunctions3811.1. Variation of an injunction3811.2. Discharge of an injunction3811.3. Review of an injunction392
Statutory Guidance Injunctions to Prevent Gang-Related Violence and Gang-Related Drug Dealing11.3.1. Injunctions for applicants aged 14 to 17 years old: Mandatory review of Injunctions	3911.4. Injunctions for applicants aged 14 to 17 years old: Transfer of proceedings	3912. Breach and enforcement of an injunction	4112.1. Consultation between partners to monitor compliance	4112.2. Compiling evidence of breach	4112.3. Bringing about breach hearings	4212.4. Power of arrest	4312.5. Warrant of arrest	4312.6. Breach proceedings, forms and fees	4412.7. Standard of proof	4512.8. Remand	4512.9. Breach of injunction	4612.9.1. Injunctions for applicants aged 14 to 17 years old: Supervision Orders	4612.9.2. Injunctions for applicants aged 14 to 17 years old: Detention Orders	4813. Appealing an injunction	4913.1. Appealing an injunction made ‘with notice’	4913.2. Appealing an injunction made ‘without notice’	4914. Promoting awareness of gang injunctions	5014.1. Communicating the use or intended use of gang injunctions	5014.2. Publicising details of particular gang injunctions	5015. Monitoring and review	5115.1. The importance of case file management	5115.2. Post-legislative review of gang injunctions	5115.3. Ongoing monitoring of gang injunctions	5115.4. Equality Impact Assessment	5216. Consideration of the public sector equality duty	53Annex A	54Annex B	74Annex C	75Annex D	78Annex E	793
Statutory Guidance Injunctions to Prevent Gang-Related Violence and Gang-Related Drug Dealing4
Statutory Guidance Injunctions to Prevent Gang-Related Violence and Gang-Related Drug Dealing1. Introduction1.1. BackgroundThis revised statutory guidance on injunctions to prevent gang-related violence and gang-related drug dealing draws on the experience and knowledge of the police service, local authorities and a wide range of local partners involved in dealing with violent gangs. It has been developed and approved by partners across the Criminal Justice System, as well as local practitioners. It has been produced after consultation with the Lord Chief Justice, and has been laid before Parliament by the Home Secretary.The Policing and Crime Act 2009 (‘the 2009 Act’) contains provisions for injunctions to prevent gang-related violence and gang-related drug dealing activity to be sought against an individual; these were commenced in January 2011.The Crime and Security Act 2010 contains provisions for breach of an injunction to be enforced against 14 to 17 year olds; the Crime and Courts Act 2013 moved jurisdiction for these proceedings from the County Court to the Youth Court.The Serious Crime Act 2015 contains provisions that amend the statutory definition of what comprises a “gang”, as defined in section 34(5) of Part IV of the Policing and Crime Act 2009, and expands the scope of the activity a person must have engaged in, encouraged or assisted, or needs to be protected from, before a gang injunction can be imposed to include drug dealing activity.1.2. Terminology used in the guidanceThroughout this guidance the term ‘gang injunction’ is used to refer to an injunction to prevent gang-related violence and gang-related drug dealing. The individual who is subject to a gang injunction, or against whom a gang injunction is being sought, will be referred to as the ‘respondent’. The police force or local authority applying for a gang injunction will be referred to as the ‘applicant’. The use of ‘court’ refers to the County Court or High Court where the respondent is over 18 years old at the time the application for a gang injunction is made, and Youth Court where the respondent is 14-17 years old at the time the application is made.1.3. Purpose of the guidanceThis statutory guidance is a practical tool intended to help local partners apply for and manage gang injunctions effectively and appropriately in accordance with the statutory framework. It is for:ï local authorities and police forces who are seeking to apply for an injunction to prevent gang-related violence or gang-related drug dealing activity; andï local partners who may be consulted by the applicant as part of the process. These may include, but are not limited to, registered social landlords, housing associations, transport agencies, probation and youth offending teams (where the respondent is aged 14 to 17 or has recently turned 18).Local authorities and police forces are required by the 2009 Act to ‘have regard’ to this guidance and any subsequent revisions. It is good practice for other local partners to have read this document before contributing to the application process. A practitioners’ guide to gang injunctions5
Statutory Guidance Injunctions to Prevent Gang-Related Violence and Gang-Related Drug Dealingfor applicants will be made available at Gov.UK. The guide provides information on how to build a case, guidance on drafting and filing applications, and advice on how to approach follow-up enforcement. The practical guide is intended to be read alongside this Statutory Guidance.6
Statutory Guidance Injunctions to Prevent Gang-Related Violence and Gang-Related Drug Dealing2. Gang injunctions: the basics2.1. What are gang injunctions?A gang injunction is a civil tool that allows the police or a local authority to apply to the County Court, High Court or Youth Court for an injunction against an individual to prevent gang-related violence and gang-related drug dealing. By imposing a range of prohibitions and requirements on the respondent, a gang injunction aims:1ï to prevent the respondent from engaging in, or encouraging or assisting, gang-related violence or gang-related drug dealing activity; and/orï to protect the respondent from gang-related violence or gang-related drug dealing activity.Over the medium and longer term, gang injunctions aim to break down violent gang culture, prevent the violent behaviour of gang members from escalating and engage gang members in positive activities to help them leave the gang. Gang injunctions can also be used to help protect people, in particular children, from being drawn further into more serious activity.Anyone seeking to apply for an injunction must have evidence that the respondent has engaged in, encouraged or assisted gang-related violence or gang-related drug dealing; and will need to be able to prove this on the balance of probabilities at court. Applicants will also need to convince the court that the gang injunction is necessary to prevent the respondent from being involved in gang- related violence and gang-related drug dealing and/or to protect the respondent from such violence or drug dealing activity.2.2. What is gang-related violence?Section 34(5) of the 2009 Act defines gang-related violence as:“Violence or a threat of violence which occurs in the course of, or is otherwise related to, the activities of a group that:a) consists of at least 3 people; and,b) has one or more characteristics that enable its members to be identified by others as a group.”Gang injunctions are intended to be used against members of violent street gangs. However, setting out what is meant by ‘gang-related violence’ in legislation is a complex task. The nature and form of gang-related violence varies significantly between areas and is not easily captured by a single definition. The wording of the statutory definition used in the 2009 Act (as amended by the Serious Crime Act 2015) is therefore intentionally broad and wide-ranging to ensure gang injunctions can be used effectively in response to the different gangs encountered in different local areas.It is important for applicants to have a sound understanding of the gang problem in their local area in order to satisfy the court that the respondent has been involved in gang-related violence. This understanding should be informed by intelligence from the community and local partners.1	Section 34(3) of the 2009 Act.7
Statutory Guidance Injunctions to Prevent Gang-Related Violence and Gang-Related Drug Dealing2.3. What is gang-related drug dealing?Section 34(5) of the 2009 Act defines gang-related drug dealing activity as:“the unlawful production, supply, importation or exportation of a controlled drug which occurs in the course of, or is otherwise related to, the activities of a group that:a) consists of at least 3 people; and,b) has one or more characteristics that enable its members to be identified by others as a group.”2.4. Which groups are not suitable for gang injunctions?Gang injunctions should only be used to prevent gang-related violence and gang-related drug dealing that is committed by groups that fall under the section 34(5) definition. Applicants should not seek injunctions against members of groups which do not fall under that definition.All applications must focus on gang-related violence and gang-related drug dealing rather than, for example, acts of anti-social behaviour or acquisitive crime.2.5. Who can apply for a gang injunction?Section 37 of the 2009 Act makes provision for an application to be made by:a) the chief officer of police for a police area;b) the chief constable of the British Transport Police Force; orc) a local authority.For this purpose, ‘local authority’ means:a) in relation to England, a district council, a county council, a London borough council, the Common Council of the City of London or the Council of the Isles of Scilly;b) in relation to Wales, a county council or a county borough council.Chief Officers of police may give their consent for applications to be made by other senior police officers on their behalf.2.6. How do ‘with notice’ and ‘without notice’ applications differ?An application for a gang injunction should ideally be made ‘with notice’ (see Section 9.2) being given to the respondent. However, there may be circumstances where an applicant may seek to make an application ‘without notice’ (see Section 9.1) being given to the respondent.For ‘with notice’ applications, applicants are required to notify the respondent of the application and to consult appropriate police forces, local authorities, youth offending teams (if the respondent is under 18) and other bodies and individuals. It is good practice to notify the respondent at the same time as submitting an application to the court. The notification and consultation requirement do not apply for ‘without notice’ applications. More detail on the consultation requirement and when it applies can be found in Section 6.8
Statutory Guidance Injunctions to Prevent Gang-Related Violence and Gang-Related Drug Dealing2.7. What prohibitions and requirements can gang injunctions impose?A gang injunction can include any reasonable prohibition or requirement. Applicants will need to satisfy the court that these terms are necessary either to prevent the respondent from engaging in, encouraging or assisting gang-related violence or gang-related drug dealing, and/or to protect the respondent from gang-related violence or gang-related drug dealing. See Section 8 for guidance on injunction prohibitions and requirements. Applicants will develop prohibitions and requirements with partners during the consultation process. See section 6 for guidance on consultation.2.8. How do gang injunctions fit with other measures to tackle gangs?Gang injunctions are one of a range of tools and interventions used in local areas as part of a broader, strategic response to local gang problems.Those involved in gang-related violence and/or gang-related drug dealing should be prosecuted under criminal law if there is sufficient evidence and this is in the public interest. However, there may be instances where criminal proceedings have not yet been brought and applying for a gang injunction may be an appropriate response. These instances could include where a criminal investigation is still ongoing or the Crown Prosecution Service (CPS) has yet to decide whether to charge an individual. Under these circumstances, gang injunctions may be able to offer the local community immediate relief from the problem of gang-related violence and/or gang-related drug dealing and to help respondents to leave the gang lifestyle. Applicants should ensure that they are in close and regular contact with the CPS where an injunction is being considered alongside potential criminal proceedings.9
Statutory Guidance Injunctions to Prevent Gang-Related Violence and Gang-Related Drug Dealing3. Young people and gangs3.1. Young people’s involvement in gangsTeenagers can be particularly vulnerable to recruitment into gangs and involvement in gang violence. This vulnerability may be exacerbated by risk factors in an individual’s background, including violence in the family, involvement of siblings in gangs, poor educational attainment, or mental health problems.The teenage years are often the critical point for intervention to prevent the young person becoming further involved in gangs, gang violence and gang-related drug dealing activity. Crisis points in a young person’s life such as arrest, school exclusion, or A&E admission can provide vital opportunities to persuade the young person to leave the gang lifestyle. Gang injunctions offer local partners a way to intervene and to engage the young person with positive activities, with the aim of preventing further involvement in gangs, violence and/or gang-related drug dealing activity.3.2. Issues to consider when applying for a gang injunction against a respondent between the ages of 14 and 17Specific issues to consider when dealing with a respondent between the ages of 14 and 17 are highlighted under the relevant sections of this guidance. Applicants should have regard to the following general principles when considering a gang injunction against a 14 to 17 year old:ï Section 11 of the Children Act 2004, which places a duty on local authorities, police and others to make arrangements to ensure that in discharging their functions they have regard to the need to safeguard and promote the welfare of children.ï Gang injunctions will be sought because an applicant believes that the young person is at risk of engaging in or being a victim of, gang-related violence or gang-related drug dealing. There are clear child protection processes to follow when significant harm or the risk of significant harm has been identified. Local children’s services who have legal responsibilities for safeguarding and child protection should be involved in discussions regarding a potential gang injunction for a 14 to 17 year old and to advise what action it would be appropriate to take to ensure the safety of the young person and to protect him or her from significant harm.ï Applicants should have regard to the appropriate guidance in respect of safeguarding processes.2 Close partnership working and shared intelligence between local authority children’s social care, law enforcement and public protection agencies will be vital to achieve the right balance of support and criminal justice response, whilst safeguarding the child’s welfare.ï There are a range of factors that increase the risk of a young person becoming involved in gang violence and gang-related drug dealing, and a number of agencies that can identify these risk factors and intervene. Youth Offending Teams (YOTs) are a statutory consultation partner and are well placed, and have the tools to undertake holistic assessments, including managing risk and vulnerability.2	Working Together to Safeguard Children is available at: https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/working-together-to-safeguard-children10
Statutory Guidance Injunctions to Prevent Gang-Related Violence and Gang-Related Drug Dealingï Comprehensive assessment tools, information sharing, and agreed referral arrangements are important to ensure that young people get the support they need. A gang injunction should be seen as a tool within a wider partnership approach to dealing with gang violence and gang- related drug dealing amongst under 18s.ï Where appropriate, applicants should work closely with the young person’s family, from the earliest possible stage, to ensure parental/family support. Evidence suggests that where parents are supportive, interventions are more likely to succeed.11
Statutory Guidance Injunctions to Prevent Gang-Related Violence and Gang-Related Drug Dealing4. Women, girls and gangs4.1. Women and girls’ involvement in gangsInjunction applications made against gang-involved women and girls must take account of their specific needs and experiences, which are often different to those of gang-associated men and boys. Women and girls who are associated with gangs are at risk of violence, particularly sexual violence (including sexual assault, rape and sexual exploitation). Whilst some may choose to take part in gang-related crime, they can also be subject to coercion to commit crimes such as carrying weapons and/or drugs.A 2013 report by University of Bedfordshire, ‘It’s wrong… but you get used to it: A qualitative study of gang-associated sexual violence towards, and exploitation of, young people in England’3 found that there are significant levels of sexual victimisation within the gang environment, and young women are particularly at risk. In addition, many young women are blamed by young men and other young women for their experiences of sexual victimisation and many young people viewed rape and sexual assault as ‘normal’ sexual behaviour.A 2013 report by the Centre for Mental Health on ‘A need to belong: what leads girls to join gangs’ which surveyed young people who had been arrested, found that girls with links to gangs were four times more likely than other girls entering the Youth Justice System to report poor relationships with their families and peers.4 Gang association in girls was also found to be linked to parental imprisonment, substance misuse or poor mental health; victimisation such as neglect, sexual or physical abuse, and witnessing or experiencing domestic violence; a history of going missing from home, poor educational performance and exclusion from school. Also, over a quarter of gang- involved young women were identified by workers as having a suspected diagnosable mental health problem, many also had self-harmed and had eating, sleeping or behavioural problems.4.2. Issues to consider when applying for a gang injunction against a female respondentApplicants must always ensure that the injunction is tailored to the specific circumstances of the respondent and is understood as part of a broader strategy. In the case of gang-associated women and girls, the heightened risk they face owing to their gender must be properly considered.Although by no means exhaustive, the list below outlines specific issues that applicants should consider when dealing with a female respondent:ï Applicants may be likely to apply for an injunction against a female respondent for ‘encouraging’ or ‘assisting’ gang-related violence or gang-related drug dealing, rather than for ‘engaging’ in such violence directly. Female respondents may not, therefore, immediately recognise that they are doing anything wrong because they themselves may not be committing acts of gang-related violence or gang-related drug dealing. They may also be being coerced by3	Beckett, H et al. It’s wrong… but you get used to it: A qualitative study of gang-associated sexual violence towards, and exploitation of, young people in England.” November 2013,http://www.beds.ac.uk/ data/assets/pdf_file/0005/293234/Gangs-Report-final.pdf. This study was commissioned by the Office of the Children’s Commissioner for England as part of its Inquiry into CSE in groups and gangs.4	Available at http://www.centreformentalhealth.org.uk/a-need-to-belong12
Statutory Guidance Injunctions to Prevent Gang-Related Violence and Gang-Related Drug Dealinga partner, friend, or relative to engage or assist in such violence. Before these women and girls are faced with an injunction, it is important that efforts are made to educate them about the harm that their involvement in gangs is causing, including risk to themselves via such association, and to raise awareness of or refer them to appropriate support services in their local area.ï A woman or girl involved with a gang may have close personal or familial relationships with gang members. This will need to be taken into account when applicants propose injunction prohibitions and requirements, to ensure that the injunction can meet its aims without disproportionately infringing upon the rights of the respondent. When there are close personal or familial relationships between individuals against whom a prohibition of non-association has been ordered, there is a high likelihood of breach. In such situations, the prohibition will need to be imposed and enforced carefully and sensitively, and it may be that association may be acceptable at particular times, dates or places.ï When applicants propose injunction requirements for a female respondent, they should refer to rehabilitative services which are appropriate for women and have experience in dealing with issues which affect gang-associated women, such as gang-related and sexual violence. Applicants could consider referring female respondents to support services.5ï A non-statutory definition of domestic violence has now been extended to include those aged 16-17 and covers coercive control. A new domestic abuse offence has also been introduced (to be implemented) and captures repeated or continuous coercive and controlling behaviour perpetrated by those aged over the standard age of criminal liability against partners or family members.6 Applicants could consider referring respondents to local independent domestic violence advisors.7ï The Youth Justice Board (YJB) has produced a ‘self assessment tool’ for Youth Offending Teams working with girls who offend, this tool includes a recommendation that YOTs provide a ‘safe space’ where girls can access youth and criminal justice services without risk to their safety. Services supporting women who are subject to a gang injunction should provide a ‘female-only’ space if possible, and may wish to consider the YJB’s other recommendations. The self assessment tool can be viewed here: https://www.justice.gov.uk/downloads/youth- justice/YOT-healthcheck-girls.docï Applicants should be particularly cautious about publicising the details of individual gang injunctions where women or girls may be involved or vulnerable. Section 13 of this guidance provides further advice in relation to publicising injunctions.ï As with considering gang injunctions for young people under 18, applicants must liaise with support services working with the woman or girl in question (for example social workers, teachers, health visitors, youth offending team staff, voluntary sector support workers) to ensure an appropriate safety plan is developed. If the girl or woman is not known to other services, applicants should speak to their local authority’s gangs unit (if they have one), or child or adult safeguarding team.5	Some areas have young people’s advocates who directly support young women who have experienced or are at risk of gang-related sexual violence.6	http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2015/9/part/5/crossheading/domestic-abuse/enacted7	https://www.gov.uk/domestic-violence-and-abuse#domestic-violence-and-abuse-new-definition13
Statutory Guidance Injunctions to Prevent Gang-Related Violence and Gang-Related Drug Dealing5. The secure estate5.1. The impact of an injunction on the secure estateGangs and gang-related violence is an issue within the secure estate.Just as violent incidents in custody can impact on local community tensions, violence happening within the community can also have an impact inside the secure estate. The possible consequences of an injunction on individuals connected to the respondent who are in custody should be considered when making an application. This may include consideration of whether restrictions placed on the gang activity of the respondent may prevent or lead to gang-related violence occurring within the secure estate. Where this is relevant, the applicant should inform the appropriate prison-police liaison intelligence officer or the prison security team. In the event of an under 18 respondent being affected, the YOT should inform the YJB placements team.Proper consideration should be given by the parties involved in the gang injunction about the need for an application for the variation or discharge of the gang injunction when a young person will be in custody.14
Statutory Guidance Injunctions to Prevent Gang-Related Violence and Gang-Related Drug Dealing6. ConsultationGang injunctions should be based upon and supported by multi-agency partnership working.6.1. Consultation requirement for ‘with notice’ applicationsFor ‘with notice’ applications, the 2009 Act includes a ‘consultation requirement’. This requires the applicant to consult any local authority, chief police officer, and other body or individual that that the applicant thinks appropriate prior to an application being made. Where the respondent is aged 14 to 17, this must include the Youth Offending Team (YOT) in whose area the respondent resides. If the respondent is already under YOT supervision in another area, then the local YOT might wish to refer the matter to the YOT with responsibility for the existing supervision. If it appears that the respondent resides in more than one YOT area (for example if the respondent splits their time between different family members) then the applicant may decide which YOT it would be appropriate to consult.It is good practice for applicants to consult with all local authorities and police forces that have responsibility over the areas in which the respondent resides and which are likely to be covered by the terms of the injunction. Where under 18s are concerned, there is a statutory requirement to consult with YOTs. Gang injunctions are unlikely to be enforceable without the support of these partners. The applicant may be asked by the court to provide proof that they have consulted appropriate police forces, local authorities and YOTs, and should prepare a statement to be signed by these partners.Applicants should also ensure that they consult the CPS team that have responsibility over the areas in which the respondent resides and which are likely to covered by the terms of the injunction. This is so applicants can discuss any potential parallel criminal proceedings, ensure the impact of one set of proceedings is considered in relation to the other, and so that the CPS may advise on any disclosure issues in relation to both proceedings and on the consequences of adducing evidence.Applicants are also required to consult any other body or individual that they think it appropriate to consult. The consultation may include:ï YOTs, where the respondent has recently turned 18 and has had previous involvement with these services;ï probation services;ï local children’s servicesï the head teacher/principal of the respondent’s school/college;ï voluntary or other support services working with the respondent and/or their family or partner; andï the respondent’s housing provider/ association.Once an injunction has been granted, the police and local authority will need to work closely with one another and with any other relevant local partners to ensure the injunction can be managed and enforced effectively.15
Statutory Guidance Injunctions to Prevent Gang-Related Violence and Gang-Related Drug Dealing6.2. Consultation requirement and ‘without notice’ applicationsThe consultation requirement in the 2009 Act does not apply in the initial stages of a ‘without notice’ application. However, if the court decides to adjourn the hearing, the applicant will need to meet the consultation requirement before the date of the first full hearing.In any event, applicants should try to ensure that consultation takes place before a ‘without notice’ application. If this is not possible, applications must ensure they have complied with the full consultation requirements by the date of the first hearing.6.3. Managing the consultation processIt is good practice for applicants to use the consultation process to:ï confirm whether the respondent’s behaviour falls within the 2009 Act’s definition of gang- related violence and gang-related drug dealing, and any agreed local understanding of gang- related violence and/or gang-related drug dealing;ï establish whether a gang injunction is the most appropriate measure to prevent the individual’s involvement in gang-related violence and/or gang-related drug dealing;ï identify the most appropriate injunction prohibitions and requirements to prevent the individual’s involvement in gang-related violence and/or gang-related drug dealing;ï identify services for the delivery/ monitoring/ assessment of the requirements and conditionsï carry out a risk assessment to identify and mitigate the potential negative impacts of a gang injunction on the safety of the respondent, their family, partner(s), and associates;ï consider the needs of victims and witnesses and make appropriate provision for these; andï gather evidence in support of a gang injunction.Applicants will need to satisfy the court that any proposed prohibitions and requirements are effective, proportionate and enforceable. For example, if the applicant is a local authority, the court will want to hear whether the local police force, or potentially the YOT in the case of a 14 to 17 year old, has agreed to enforce compliance, including by informing the applicant of any suspected breach.6.3.1. Risk assessmentThe aim of a gang injunction is to prevent an individual from engaging in, encouraging or assisting gang-related violence or gang-related drug dealing; and/or to protect an individual from gang- related violence or gang-related drug dealing. Given this, it is essential for applicants to consider whether any of the proposed prohibitions or requirements may compromise the safety of the respondent and their family, partner(s), or associates.For example, if a respondent is subject to a curfew or required to avoid contact with an individual, it is possible that this might present a risk to either the safety of the respondent or the individual in that it might remove them from the ‘protection’ offered by their gang against violence from rival gang members. This does not automatically mean that such a condition should not be included as the risk of violence to the respondent and the wider community of not doing so may be greater, but that it is good practice for applicants to carry out a full assessment of the risks to the respondent, their family, partner(s) or associates posed by any of the proposed terms of the injunction and put in place measures to address these. Further information on potential risks to female respondents, family members and associates is included in Sections 4 and 5.16
Statutory Guidance Injunctions to Prevent Gang-Related Violence and Gang-Related Drug Dealing6.3.2. Promoting access to health and social care servicesIf an applicant has reason to believe that the respondent has substance misuse or mental health problems, an autistic spectrum disorder or any other health condition, applicants should promote their access to the relevant health and social care services in order that the respondent receives the support that they need. The process of helping the respondent to access this support should run in parallel with the collection of evidence for an injunction application. This helps the court to ensure community safety through the most appropriate response to the respondent’s behaviour.The Children and Families Act 2014 has replaced statements of Special Educational Needs and Learning Difficulty Assessment with education, health and care (EHC) plans from September 2014. EHC plans assess a young person’s needs in a person-centred, coherent way across education, health and care services and will focus on positive outcomes. This includes planning for the transition into post-16 education. The Act also gives new rights to young people with Special Educational Needs, and places new duties on local authorities and the further education sector to support such young people. Where there is evidence of Special Educational Needs and/or an EHC Plan is already in existence, it is expected that this information will be collected and considered within the injunction application.6.3.3. ConfidentialityIt is good practice for all partners attending consultation meetings to be made aware that meetings are confidential and that the information discussed ought not to be divulged to any other party, including the respondent. Applicants may wish to seek legal advice with regards to data protection and how to respond to requests for minutes to be disclosed.If applicants plan to invite a representative from a support service that works closely with the respondent and/or their family to the consultation meeting, they might consider inviting them only to the parts of the meeting where matters relevant to their service are discussed. This is particularly important during meetings in which more than one respondent is being discussed.Applicants should also be aware of the importance of preserving the confidentiality of medical records. The local NHS Caldicott Guardian can advise on those instances when patient consent to share information needs to be obtained and how such information can be used.Care should also be taken not to name or identify any victims or independent/community witnesses during wider consultation meetings. Witness safety is paramount and in many circumstances identities may only be divulged at court. When necessary, applicants should consider making an application for a non-disclosure order relating to witnesses’ identities and addresses.17
Statutory Guidance Injunctions to Prevent Gang-Related Violence and Gang-Related Drug Dealing7. Evidence gathering7.1. Obtaining and reviewing evidence – general principlesPresenting evidence to the court is a matter of careful judgment by applicants and their legal advisers. Applicants should always bear in mind the need for careful consideration and judgment in presenting their cases, not least to avoid hearings being unnecessarily adjourned because cases are not ready or evidence is not available.Applicants should remember that they are obliged to assist the court in actively managing cases in order to further the overriding objective of enabling a court to deal with cases justly (Civil Procedure Rules 1.3).8Applicants will need to gather evidence in support of their application for a gang injunction. This evidence must demonstrate that:ï the respondent has engaged in, encouraged or assisted gang-related violence or gang-related drug dealing; andï the gang injunction is necessary to prevent the respondent from engaging in, encouraging or assisting gang-related violence or gang-related drug dealing; and/orï the gang injunction is necessary to protect the respondent from gang-related violence or gang- related drug dealing.Care should be taken to ensure the right level of evidence and/or witnesses are used, in order to avoid unnecessary delays in the process. For example, applicants may focus on a few well- documented examples that provide evidence that the respondent has been involved in gang- related violence and/or gang-related drug dealing in the local area.Where there is proof beyond reasonable doubt that an individual has been involved in gang-related violence and/or gang-related drug dealing, applicants should be liaising with the appropriate authorities to see whether they can assist in providing evidence for prosecution under criminal law.7.2. Evidence for ‘with notice’ hearingsIn compiling evidence for a ‘with notice’ application, applicants are advised to provide a general background on the respondent and their history of gang involvement, as well as evidence of specific incidents of gang-related violence or gang-related drug dealing. It is good practice to use consultations with appropriate local authorities, police forces, YOTs (for 14 to 17 year olds or those recently turned 18 years of age) and other partners to gather evidence in support of an injunction application.8	The Civil Procedure Rules (‘CPR’) are available at http://www.justice.gov.uk/civil/procrules_fin/menus/rules.htm.18
Statutory Guidance Injunctions to Prevent Gang-Related Violence and Gang-Related Drug Dealing7.3. Evidence for ‘without notice’ hearings‘Without notice’ applications are likely to be made in response to specific threats of violence or gang-related drug dealing, and applicants are therefore unlikely to have adequate time to put together an extensive evidence pack before the hearing. Given that ‘without notice’ applications may be made in urgent circumstances and to tight timetables, the requirement to consult with appropriate local partners before the initial hearing is waived. However, applicants must ensure full consultation has taken place by the first hearing.Time constraints will probably mean that the evidence will be brief, but applicants would usually be expected to show the court that they have intelligence relating to a specific threat or expected act of violence. It is likely that the evidence applicants present will be in written form, and this can include written witness statements. Regardless of any time constraints, it is the responsibility of the applicant to ensure that any evidence presented at a ‘without notice’ hearing is relevant, correct and complete.7.4. Admissible forms of evidenceIt is a matter for the court to decide what evidence is relevant or admissible in any particular case. However the court can determine that a wide range of evidence may be used by applicants, for example:ï direct evidence from witnesses (witness statements);ï hearsay evidence from community members and/or police officers;ï documentary evidence;ï statements from professional witnesses (for example council officials or health professionals) or other expert evidence;ï photographic, video or CCTV evidence, screen captures of gang members’ internet pages;ï previous relevant arrests or convictions;ï items seized during searches, such as clothing which identifies a respondent with a particular gang, evidence of communication with other gang members, evidence of drug dealing etc.9Although the court will decide in each case what evidence is relevant or admissible, it is advisable that applicants carefully consider what evidence they seek to introduce. Seeking to cast doubt on the respondent’s character through using unrelated evidence may not be well received by the court. For example, it is unlikely that evidence showing that the respondent has engaged in criminality that is not gang-related would be admissible. Evidence that the respondent has previously engaged in gang-related violence and/or gang-related drug dealing is much more likely to be ruled relevant and admissible.First-hand evidence (i.e. evidence from a witness describing what they have seen or encountered) is preferable. The most effective evidence is that which comes directly from those living in communities affected by gang-related violence and gang-related drug dealing and who can identify the respondent as being a member of the gang and being involved in gang-related violence and/or gang-related drug dealing.9	See Parts 32 and 33 of the Civil Procedure Rules on evidence.19
Statutory Guidance Injunctions to Prevent Gang-Related Violence and Gang-Related Drug Dealing7.5. Hearsay evidenceIn the context of gang-related violence and gang-related drug dealing, the potential for intimidation is high and victims and witnesses may be too afraid to provide statements for fear of reprisal. The admissibility of professional witness and hearsay evidence is intended to help overcome this problem.Hearsay evidence is that which is gathered by one person from another. This enables a statement to be made on behalf of a witness who does not wish to give first-hand evidence themselves. This can also allow the identities of those too fearful to give evidence to be protected. Such hearsay evidence could be provided by a police officer, healthcare official or any other professional who has interviewed the witness directly.Whilst hearsay evidence cannot be excluded (at the request of the respondent) on the grounds that it is hearsay, applicants should remember that the weight given to hearsay evidence at court will tend to be less than that given to first-hand evidence (i.e. evidence provided directly by the person who witnessed the incident described). Similarly, more detailed hearsay statements may be given greater weight than those that are less detailed. Therefore, if a witness gives hearsay evidence without detailing the person who provided this information, this is likely to carry less weight than first-hand evidence from that person. Ultimately it remains a matter for the court to decide what weight, if any, to attach to a particular hearsay statement.Applicants should note that the rules determining the admissibility of hearsay evidence in criminal and civil proceedings are not the same.Where applicants intend to rely on hearsay evidence in the County Court, they must act in accordance with Part 33 of the Civil Procedure Rules. Hearsay evidence at hearings other than trials does not generally require written notice.Where applicants intend to rely on hearsay evidence in the Youth Court, they must act in accordance with Magistrates’ Courts (Hearsay Evidence in Civil Proceedings) Rules 1999 (S.I. 1999/681).10When presenting hearsay evidence to the court, applicants will need to ensure that they have undertaken a security risk assessment and implemented any necessary security measures. Section 9.5 provides more details on court security. More information on witness care can be found in Section 9.6.7.6. Police and Local Authority intelligencePolice and local authority systems may contain intelligence relevant to an injunction application. This intelligence may indicate to the court the level of risk a respondent presents or provide information relating to their involvement in gang-related violence and/or gang-related drug dealing. Police or local authority intelligence may come from a number of sources and will likely be codified to show the reliability of the sources.It is good practice for applicants to consider the operational implications of using police or local authority intelligence in court and to seek legal advice from force solicitors around how best to use and present this evidence. If the applicant is a local authority, close liaison with police partners will be necessary in order to use information drawn from police intelligence. This information should be10 See: http://www.legislation.gov.uk/uksi/1999/681/made/data.pdf20
Statutory Guidance Injunctions to Prevent Gang-Related Violence and Gang-Related Drug Dealingappropriately sanitised by the police before it is considered for sharing with partners or used in these proceedings. One way of minimising risk is to provide a statement with appropriately sanitised details of relevant intelligence. Consideration should be given to the quality, reliability, age and relevance of the intelligence and the consequences of that information being shared at court, including its potential to compromise a source or policing operation.Applications for Public Interest Immunity may be needed to address these risks. See section 9.7.1 for information on Public Interest Immunity applications.In relevant cases, applicants should consider consulting the CPS, particularly when parallel criminal proceedings are ongoing or being considered. This consultation should take into account that parallel (or later) proceedings could affect what evidence is disclosed and therefore early consideration of these matters should help to reduce the number of unnecessary disclosure and/or Public Interest Immunity applications.7.7. Standard of proofSection 34 of the 2009 Act states that the court must be satisfied on the balance of probabilities that the respondent has engaged in, or has encouraged or assisted, gang-related violence or gang-related drug dealing.Applicants should remember that the standard of proof for proving that the respondent has breached a condition of the injunction is ‘beyond reasonable doubt’.21
Statutory Guidance Injunctions to Prevent Gang-Related Violence and Gang-Related Drug Dealing8. Drafting the terms of the proposed injunctionApplicants may apply for any reasonable prohibition or requirement, provided that it does not:11ï conflict with the respondent’s religious beliefs; orï interfere with the times, if any, at which the respondent normally works or attends any educational establishment.In deciding upon which prohibitions and requirements to include, it is good practice for applicants to consider the following:ï Does the evidence show that the prohibitions and requirements are necessary to prevent gang- related violence or gang-related drug dealing or protect the respondent from gang-related violence or gang-related drug dealing?ï Are they targeted at the needs and behaviour of this particular respondent?ï Are they enforceable?ï Are they clear, concise and easy for the respondent and partners to understand?ï Do they have any implications for the respondent’s human rights?12ï Will they have the effect of protecting and reassuring the public?A draft of the proposed gang injunction terms must be included in the application form, which should include all proposed prohibitions and requirements, their duration and any powers of arrest to be attached.When seeking an injunction against an adult, an applicant should complete the N16A application form. In cases where the injunction is against an under 18, an applicant should complete the MC200 application form.Applicants will need to be prepared for the court to examine each prohibition and requirement, and will need to be able to justify how each of these is necessary to prevent the respondent from engaging in, encouraging or assisting gang-related violence or gang-related drug dealing or to protect the respondent from such violence or criminality.8.1. Length of prohibitionsAs with all other conditions, the duration of each prohibition should be determined according to the unique circumstances of each case. The length of a prohibition should be designed so as to make the injunction as effective as possible in preventing gang-related violence and/or gang-related drug dealing, whilst being mindful of the rights of the respondent and the need of the injunction to be fair and proportionate.There is no minimum duration for an injunction or any conditions contained within. However, no prohibition or requirement can be ordered to last for more than two years. Additionally, if any prohibition or requirement in the injunction is to have effect for more than one year (beginning with11 Section 35(5) of the Policing and Crime Act 2009.12 Including those protected under the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child.22
Statutory Guidance Injunctions to Prevent Gang-Related Violence and Gang-Related Drug Dealingthe date the injunction is granted), the court must order the applicant and the respondent to attend a review hearing within the last 4 weeks of the one year period.8.2. Examples of prohibitionsThese examples are based on the suggested prohibitions in the 2009 Act. The suggestions in section 35(2) of the 2009 Act are not exhaustive and therefore applicants may apply for any reasonable prohibition.8.2.1. Non-associationA respondent may have been involved in gang-related violence and/or gang-related drug dealing with certain individuals in the past and be shown to be at risk of future involvement in gang-related violence or gang-related drug dealing with them. In these circumstances, applicants may wish to consider prohibiting a respondent from associating in public with named gang members.However, difficulties with enforcing this prohibition may arise if the respondent is closely related to the other members of his/her gang or is required to be in their presence. These difficulties may arise if, for example, they attend the same educational institution, workplace or place of religious worship, or are in a relationship or have a child together. Where non-association conditions may be compromised due to education or another reasonable circumstance, the application should clearly state on which days and at what times the association condition is in force.It would be more difficult to justify before a court why a non-association provision should extend to private spaces, and applicants would need to demonstrate why such a condition is both necessary and proportionate. Where such a prohibition is considered appropriate, it may be difficult to monitor and enforce. In such cases, evidence from neighbours, housing authorities, or police officers will be integral in monitoring compliance with the terms of the injunction.Special attention should be given to those respondents who are in custody. Engagement with the secure estate will be required to ensure information about the terms and conditions of the gang injunction are provided to assist case management whilst in custody and to inform release plans. This should include consideration of further non-association conditions on release from custody under an extant or new injunction or as part of supervision requirements.8.2.2. Exclusion zonesAn exclusion zone prohibits the respondent from visiting or travelling through a particular area or areas. Applicants should be able to demonstrate that such a prohibition is both proportionate and enforceable (i.e. not excluding a respondent from the entire area in which they live, work or study). Excluding a respondent from the entirety of their gang’s territory could push the respondent into the territory of a rival gang, putting them at risk of harm.It is good practice to include a map as part of the application that clearly shows the proposed exclusion zone. This map should be based on the locations of any gang-related incidents that the respondent has been involved with in the past (and on which the applicant intends to rely in the application for the injunction). These areas will most likely fall within the respondent’s ‘gang territory’.If the proposed exclusion zone covers areas in which the respondent lives, works, studies or worships (or engages in any other reasonable activity), the applicant will need to allow for a clear travel route to and from these locations. The respondent will also need to provide details of any other locations or appointments they will need to attend during the period of the injunction, and the applicant will need to ensure that acceptable arrangements are made to facilitate this and that this23
Statutory Guidance Injunctions to Prevent Gang-Related Violence and Gang-Related Drug Dealingis clearly detailed within the injunction. In the case of 14 to 17 year olds, applicants may wish to consider specifying that the respondent can only enter the exclusion zone in the company of an identified appropriate adult (e.g. a parent or youth worker). Having realistic and clearly identified routes and agreed arrangements will make exclusion zones significantly easier to enforce.Where there is a history of the respondent being involved in gang-related violence or gang-related drug dealing against ‘rival’ gangs, it may be appropriate to prevent the respondent from entering the rival gang’s ‘territory’. However the applicant will need to be able to justify this. An example of when this might be justified is if a critical incident has occurred where the victim was one of the respondent’s close associates and it is believed that the respondent will be looking to exact revenge on the rival gang in an imminent attack which, may in turn, make the respondent a victim of a reprisal attack.Where a respondent is in custody, it may be useful for the applicant to share the community tension document with the Prison Intelligence Manager where these are in use.8.2.3. Dangerous dogs and other animalsGang members may use dogs and other animals to incite fear, intimidate others or to commit acts of violence. In these circumstances, applicants may wish to consider prohibiting the respondent from being in charge of a particular species of animal or from being in a particular place with a particular species of animal.8.2.4. The use of the internet and other technologiesThere may be cases where the respondent is using, or has in the past used, the internet to encourage or assist gang-related violence or gang-related drug dealing. This may include posting videos that promote their gang or threaten rival gangs on video-sharing websites, or uploading details of gang ‘meet-ups’ on social networking websites. In such cases, it may be appropriate for the injunction to impose a prohibition restricting the use of the internet for gang-related purposes such as, for example, the uploading of gang-related videos or social networking. If such a condition is to be included in the injunction, the applicant will need to be able to satisfy the court that the prohibition is proportionate and can be effectively monitored.8.3. RequirementsApplicants may also apply for any reasonable requirement. The 2009 Act suggests a range of requirements, which may have the effect of requiring the respondent to:ï notify the person who applied for the injunction of the respondent’s address and of any change to that address;ï be at a particular place between particular times on particular days;ï present himself or herself to a particular person at a place where he or she is required to be between particular times on particular days; andï participate in particular activities between particular times on particular days.When proposing requirements to be included in an injunction, applicants should remember that no requirement can require a respondent to be in any particular place for more than 8 hours in any one day. Applicants should not seek to circumvent this, for example by proposing that the respondent must be in place A for 8 hours, place B for 8 hours and place C for 8 hours, thereby regulating every hour in the day.24
Statutory Guidance Injunctions to Prevent Gang-Related Violence and Gang-Related Drug DealingImportantly, applicants are required by the 2009 Act to ensure that any requirements, as far as practically possible, avoid:ï any conflict with the respondent’s religious beliefs; andï any interference with the times, if any, at which the respondent normally works or attends any educational establishment.8.3.1. Positive requirementsOver the medium to long term, gang injunctions are intended to help respondents leave the gang. Applicants may apply for positive requirements that work towards this aim and are encouraged to think creatively and carefully about those that they propose. Applicants should ensure that they are tailored to the individual circumstances of each case. This means taking into account specific characteristics such as ethnicity, gender or age that could require the involvement of specialist services.In practice, such requirements could translate into a requirement that the respondent attend mediation with rival gang members; attend anger-management, relationship or other behavioural sessions; adhere to a curfew (where there is evidence that gang-related violence or gang-related drug dealing occurs at particular times); undertake job-preparedness coaching or any other coaching sessions; attend a ‘call-in’ (as part of a wider programme of activities), or any other requirements as the court sees fit. The 2009 Act allows for maximum flexibility on this point to enable positive activities to be tailored to each case and address the respondent’s individual circumstances, behaviour and needs. The positive requirements should help the applicant and partner agencies work together to ensure that by the time the injunction comes to an end, the respondent is better equipped to exit and stay out of a gang lifestyle, and has a realistic understanding of alternatives to being part of a violent gang.Pre-application consultations should explore the options for positive requirements, including considering the types of positive activities that are available in the local area, how these might help prevent gang-related violence or gang-related drug dealing in the particular case of the respondent, and how compliance with such activities could be monitored and enforced.Applicants will need to be in a position to present clear evidence to the court showing that any positive requirements are available, funded and appropriate for the respondent. In addition, applicants will need to be able to show who will be responsible for the provision of the activity or monitoring the requirement and how compliance will be enforced. The best evidence is likely to be documentation from the agency responsible for providing the proposed requirement with an assessment of the respondent’s suitability for participation in that requirement.8.4. Power of arrestThe court can attach the power of arrest to any injunction prohibition or requirement, except the requirement that the respondent participates in a particular activity. The 2009 Act is framed in this way because it was not considered proportionate to have an automatic power of arrest for non- attendance at mentoring sessions or other particular activities. In these circumstances, it was considered more appropriate to rely on the applicant’s ability to apply for a warrant of arrest under section 44 of the 2009 Act or the ability to commence breach proceedings (see section 12.4 below) whereby the respondent will be served with the application notice for an order of committal.In the same way that applicants will need to consider which prohibitions and requirements are most appropriate in each case, they will also need to consider, and recommend to the court, which of these should carry a power of arrest. If applicants think it appropriate for a power of arrest to be attached to any prohibition or requirement, they should support this by way of written evidence25
Statutory Guidance Injunctions to Prevent Gang-Related Violence and Gang-Related Drug Dealingdemonstrating why the power is necessary and proportionate. Such evidence may indicate that there is a high level of risk that the respondent will breach the conditions of the injunction (e.g. evidence of previous non-compliance with other police or court orders), as well as the level of risk the respondent poses to the community should any of the conditions of the injunction be breached (e.g. a history of violent behaviour towards others).Applicants should be aware that applying to the court to attach the power of arrest to any condition could lessen their control over breach proceedings. Where no such power is attached, the decision to pursue breach proceedings rests with the applicant. However, where a power of arrest is attached, the arrest of a respondent for breach may be likely to result in breach proceedings.26
Statutory Guidance Injunctions to Prevent Gang-Related Violence and Gang-Related Drug Dealing9. Applying for InjunctionsThe 2009 Act provides for applications to be made ‘with notice’ or ‘without notice’ to the respondent.9.1. ‘Without notice’ hearingsThe 2009 Act gives applicants the right to apply for injunctions without giving notice to the respondent against whom the injunction is being sought. Applications ‘without notice’ should not be routine, and should not be used in place of adequate preparation for ‘with notice’ hearings.A ‘without notice’ application may be appropriate under the following circumstances:ï if urgent injunctive relief is necessary to prevent gang-related violence or gang-related drug dealing;ï if there is a significant risk the respondent may flee if given prior notice of an injunction application; orï if giving notice of an injunction application would be likely to put witnesses at risk of harm.A ‘without notice’ application might be appropriate, for example, in a situation of escalating tensions between gangs where there is intelligence to indicate that reprisal acts of violence are imminent. In this instance the applicant might seek an injunction against either the likely victim or perpetrator of anticipated violence, to prevent them from crossing into another gang’s territory.A ‘without notice’ application for an interim injunction is more likely to be granted if the applicant is able to present evidence that specific acts of violence are likely to occur, rather than relying more generally on a respondent’s history and character suggesting that they are involved in gang-related violence or gang-related drug dealing habitually. Although ‘without notice’ hearings are likely to be held where there is need for urgent relief, it is nonetheless incumbent on the applicant to ensure that any evidence presented is correct and complete.If an application is made ‘without notice’, the court can either dismiss the application or adjourn the hearing. The court does not have the power to grant a full injunction at a ‘without notice’ hearing. If the hearing is adjourned, the court has the power to grant an interim injunction. Therefore, if applicants are applying for a ‘without notice’ injunction and want the court to grant an interim injunction, they should ensure that the application not only presents the case for the application but also explains why an interim injunction is necessary.Applicants should note that an interim injunction can include any provision a full injunction can include except for the requirement to participate in particular activities. The interim injunction can include the power of arrest. If the applicant wishes to apply for the power of arrest to be attached to any of the terms of the injunction, they will need to make this clear in the draft injunction they hand up to the judge, as well as in the application form.The court will then adjourn until a full hearing can be held, before which the respondent must be notified.9.2. ‘With notice’ hearingsIn ‘with notice’ cases, applicants are required to notify the respondent of their application, as well as to consult appropriate police forces, local authorities, YOTs (where applicable), and other bodies and individuals. Section 6 contains more detail on the consultation requirement.27
Statutory Guidance Injunctions to Prevent Gang-Related Violence and Gang-Related Drug DealingIf applying for an injunction ‘with notice’ to the respondent, applicants should be aware that it is possible that the matter will not be resolved at the first hearing date. This could be because the respondent wants to obtain legal representation in order to contest the injunction application or that the hearing needs to be adjourned for witnesses to attend. However, applicants should not assume that the hearing will be adjourned and should be ready to proceed with a full application.When adjourning the hearing, the court has the power to grant an interim injunction if it is just and convenient to do so.13 Applicants should be prepared for the hearing to be adjourned and therefore ready to assist the court as to whether it is just and convenient to grant an interim injunction. A ‘with notice’ interim injunction can include any prohibition or requirement that the court can order under a full injunction and can include a power of arrest.14Under section 34A of the Children and Young Persons Act 1933, the court must in relation to a child under 16 (or may otherwise in any other case) require the attendance of a parent or guardian (which may include the local authority social services department), except in limited circumstances. Every effort should be made in advance of a hearing to ensure a parent or guardian attends, so that the court does not need to require their attendance.9.3. The process of applying for an injunctionThe process for applying for an injunction are set out in the Civil Procedure Rules and the Magistrates Courts (Injunctions: Gang-related violence) Rules 2015.Applications relating to an adultApplications relating to 14 to 17 year oldsSection VIII of Part 65 of the Civil Procedure Rules and Practice Direction 65 sets out the process for applying for a gang injunction for an individual aged 18 or over.Rule 3 of the Magistrates’ Courts (Injunctions: Gang-related violence) Rules 2015 set out the process for applying for a gang injunctions for an individual who is aged between 14 and 17 years old.Different procedures apply for ‘with notice’ and ‘without notice applications’.9.3.1. Documents to be provided to the courtThe lead individual in charge of the case should arrange for the application form to be completed and filed at the court. This should be submitted alongside a draft of the proposed gang injunction and a brief overview of evidence to support the application. Detailed evidence should be reserved for the hearing.Applications relating to an adultApplications relating to 14 to 17 year oldsApplications for adult gang injunction must use the Form N16A for an appropriate filingApplications for youth gang injunctions should be made to the court by ‘complaint for a youth gang injunction’ using Form MC200.Applicants should be aware that information recorded on the MC200 could be accessed by a third party. Particular consideration should be given to this in respect to under 18s.13 Section 40(2) of the Policing and Crime Act 2009.14 Section 40(3) of the Policing and Crime Act 2009.28
Statutory Guidance Injunctions to Prevent Gang-Related Violence and Gang-Related Drug Dealing9.3.2. Fee to be paidPlease refer to the current Fees Order(s) for details of the application fees.15 The fee is paid to commence proceedings. No other payment is required.9.3.3. How to prepare a court file for an applicationApplicants are advised to prepare a court file to support their application:Applications relating to an adultApplications relating to 14 to 17 year oldsFor adult injunctions ,a minimum of five bundles may be prepared as follows:ï one for the court;ï one for the applicant’s solicitor;ï one for the witness box;ï one for the respondent’s solicitor (for ‘with notice’ applications only); andï one for the respondent; (for ‘with notice’ applications only).For youth Injunctions , a minimum of six bundles may be prepared as follows:ï four for the court;ï one for the applicant’s solicitor;ï one for the respondent’s solicitor (for ’with notice’ applications only).The files should be in loose-leaf format (in an A4 ring binder) and should be indexed and the pages numbered. The index and contents should include, as appropriate:ï the application for the injunction including a draft injunction for approval by the court;ï the respondent’s details;ï a summary of the incidents being relied upon in the application;ï a map and description of any exclusion area included as part of the injunction;ï an association chart (showing relationships and connections of the respondent’s gang and any other relevant individuals);ï documentation of statutory consultation;ï disclosed documents;ï witness statements; andï any other relevant documentation.According to the Civil Procedure Rules, the respondent and their solicitor (if they are legally represented) must be served with a copy of the completed application and supporting documents,16 and a warning that it is an offence to pervert the course of justice through intimidating witnesses.It is good practice for this bundle to also include guidance on how the respondent can obtain legal advice and representation (see section 9.8 of this guidance).When an application is made on notice, the respondent (and the parent or guardian in the case of a youth) must be personally served with the application notice and a copy of the witness statement.17 For other supporting documents, wherever possible, it is advisable that service is made on the respondent (and the parent or guardian in the case of a youth) in person. If personal15 Available at http://www.justice.gov.uk/courts/fees16 Part 8 of the Civil Procedure Rules.17 CPR 65.43(5).29
Statutory Guidance Injunctions to Prevent Gang-Related Violence and Gang-Related Drug Dealingservice is not possible, the application should be served by post as soon as possible to the last known address.The bundle should be prepared and served on the respondent or the respondent’s solicitor, if s/he is represented, as soon as the application notice is served. The applicant’s solicitor should attempt to have the contents of the bundle agreed prior to any pre-trial review. Disclosure should be transparent and complete, unless a Public Interest Immunity application has been made and granted.9.4. Courts to which an application may be madeApplications for injunctions where the respondent is over 18 years of age can be made to the County Court or the High Court.Applications for gang injunctions where the respondent is 14-17 years of age can be made to the Youth Court.A court can impose prohibitions or requirements which are not geographically limited to the court area.Applications relating to an adultApplications relating to 14 to 17 year oldsApplications submitted to the County Court should be made to the court hearing centre with jurisdiction over the area in which the respondent resides or where the gang-related violence or gang-related drug dealing occurs.18If the application is on notice and is made at a County Court hearing centre which does not serve the address where the respondent resides or the conduct complained of occurred, the application will be issued by the County Court hearing centre where the application is made and sent to the appropriate hearing centre.If the application is made without notice, it can be made to any County Court hearing centre. However, any hearing thereafter requiring the attendance of the respondent will be at one of the designated hearing centres.Applications may be made to the Youth Court in the area in which the respondent resides or where the gang-related violence or gang- related drug dealing occurs.When making an application for an injunction and unless the court to which an application has been made orders otherwise, a ‘with notice’ application for an injunction or any other hearing requiring the respondent’s attendance must be heard at one of the following court hearing centres:a) Birminghamb) Bradfordc) Brightond) Bristole) Cardiff18 CPR 65.43(2)(b).30
Statutory Guidance Injunctions to Prevent Gang-Related Violence and Gang-Related Drug Dealingf) Chelmsfordg) Croydonh) Leicesteri) Liverpoolj) Lutonk) Manchesterl) Newcastlem) Norwichn) Nottinghamo) Oxfordp) Peterboroughq) Portsmouthr) Prestons) Sheffieldt) West London19These court centres were identified by HM Courts and Tribunals Service (HMCTS) as offering some of the security facilities and special measures necessary to hear cases involving potentially violent individuals.Whilst Youth Courts offer security facilities and various special measures to hear cases, the court may not be suitable to hear all cases, particularly those where a security risk has been identified. Applicants will need to liaise closely with both the police and court staff at the earliest possible opportunity to ensure appropriate security facilities and special measures to hear cases are in place. Depending on the location of any particular court, a youth hearing centre might wish to consider whether there is a nearby combined court centre which would be better equipped to deal with the application.In all cases, applicants and police should be clear about which of the security measures listed above may be necessary as it is unlikely that a case will require all of the measures.Applicants will need to liaise closely with court staff at the earliest possible opportunity to establish which of the specified courts have the facilities most appropriate to their particular case and recommend these courts in their application.Applicants may also want to consider whether a local court hearing centre is appropriately equipped to deal with a particular case and could therefore order that it retains the matter. The decision to transfer proceedings rests with the court and the applicant must be prepared to assist the court in making this decision.The judge has the power to transfer an injunction hearing to a different location if he/she believes that adequate security arrangements are not in place. This could include moving it to a different court room where possible or transferring one particular hearing to another court, or transferring the entire case to another court.19 CPR PD 65 para 1.2.31
Statutory Guidance Injunctions to Prevent Gang-Related Violence and Gang-Related Drug Dealing9.5. Courts at which an application may be heard: security considerationsApplicants should take security concerns into account throughout the entire injunction process.The greatest risks to court security are likely to be at full injunction or breach hearings, but applicants should also mitigate any potential risks associated with ‘without notice’ hearings. For all applications, it is the responsibility of applicants to liaise with courts well in advance of hearings to talk court staff through their risk assessment (and update this where necessary) to help the court come to a decision about the appropriate venue and ensure that the necessary facilities are in place. The applicant should work with the police and court staff to ensure that measures are in place to respond to any security risk(s).These risks might include:ï the listing of members of rival gangs in the same court building on the same day;ï the safety of witnesses and other community members; andï the safety of court staff.The security facilities and special measures necessary to hear cases involving potentially violent individuals, may include:ï courtroom layout – ensuring that the layout provides adequate security measures to create a safe environment;ï victim and witness facilities – to create separate waiting areas for witnesses so that they do not come into contact with respondents;ï secure cells – ensuring that secure accommodation is available to hold respondents pending any hearing/breach etc;ï special measures – to assist vulnerable/intimidated witnesses e.g. screens preventing the respondent seeing the witness or video-link; and,ï access to a witness support teamThe police must be prepared to provide a visible presence at the court should this be deemed necessary.9.6. Witness careWitnesses who are willing to give evidence in court provide the best form of evidence and, where possible, should be encouraged to come forward. However, witnesses often feel anxious about giving evidence in cases such as these. Their concerns may include the prospect of appearing in court, coming face to face with gang members or being threatened by them.The Statutory Code of Practice for Victims of Crime (Victims’ Code) sets out the service obligations which criminal justice agencies are required to provide to victims of crime. Similarly the Witness Charter sets out standards of care expected for a witness to a crime or incident in England and Wales. This Charter applies to all witnesses of a crime and to character witnesses (but not expert witnesses) and sets out what help and support may be expected at each stage of the court process from agencies.Applicants should take steps to ensure the protection of witnesses, including protecting their identity where appropriate. This means ensuring that any evidence provided does not inadvertently32
Statutory Guidance Injunctions to Prevent Gang-Related Violence and Gang-Related Drug Dealingreveal the identity of the witnesses. Applicants should be aware that the court has the power to order that the identity of any party or witness must not be disclosed if it considers non-disclosure necessary in order to protect the interests of that party or witness.20 Applicants should also be aware of recent case law which emphasises that any order of anonymity should not just be continued automatically, but that the need for the order in the particular circumstances should be reviewed at the earliest suitable opportunity.21 In addition, any grant of anonymity in civil proceedings should not be taken to imply that a similar grant of anonymity would be granted in any potential criminal proceedings.Several options are available to applicants if they are concerned about the security of witnesses. These include applying to the court for special measures, transferring hearings to a more secure court and requesting that the court protect witnesses’ identities. More details on these options is provided below. Applicants should consider each of these options and justify to the court which if any should be granted. Applicants would need to convince the court that the measure(s) are necessary and proportionate to their security concerns.The court may give permission for a witness to give evidence with the assistance of special measures, as the applicant suggests or the court (with the approval of the Judge) sees as appropriate.22 Definitions of witnesses who may be vulnerable or intimidated for the purposes of special measures assistance are contained in sections 16 and 17 of the Youth Justice and Criminal Evidence Act 1999, and guidance on eligibility for special measures can be found at http://www.justice.gov.uk/downloads/victims-and-witnesses/vulnerable-witnesses/vulnerable- intimidated-witnesses.pdf.Special measures may include:ï screens to shield the witnesses whilst entering the courtroom and standing in the witness box;ï a live link to enable the witness to give evidence during the hearing from outside the court through a televised link to the courtroom;ï evidence given in private by excluding from the court members of the public and the press; and,ï voice distortion measures.If applicants consider that the witness is central to the evidence for the application, but that any special measures considered necessary are not available at that particular court, the onus is on applicants to investigate where such measures may be available. If measures are available at another court, applicants can invite the court to transfer the hearing to that court.23If applicants consider that the available special measures will not be sufficient, they should consider asking the court to order that witness identities should not be disclosed.Applicants would need to justify to the court why this is necessary, justified and proportionate. Applicants should also consider at the earliest possible stage whether a witness may need or benefit from an interpreter at court if English is not their first language.20 CPR 39.2.21 Secretary of State for the Home Department v AP. (No. 2) [2010] UKSC 26; Grey v UVW [2010] EWHC 2367.22 CPR 32.3. For further guidance on special measures, see Crown Prosecution Service website, http://www.cps.gov.uk/legal/s_to_u/special_measures/23 CPR 30.3. 30.33
Statutory Guidance Injunctions to Prevent Gang-Related Violence and Gang-Related Drug DealingOther means of supporting key witnesses include: engagement in face-to-face meetings (this could apply also to those witnesses who do not wish to give a statement or attend court); ensuring they are made aware of what to expect, including practical information about the court layout and how proceedings will run, seeing where they and the respondent will be seated, and practical demonstrations of the appropriate special measures; and transport to and from the court or being met by a police or council officer when they arrive.It should be remembered that applicants are responsible for presenting their case to the court and this includes being responsible for the witnesses they rely on.9.7. DisclosureBefore evidence is disclosed, the applicant should consult the police and other partners to ensure that all reasonable steps have been taken to support witnesses and minimise any potential for witness intimidation. Evidence should not be disclosed without the express permission of the witness. However, evidence that is not disclosed cannot be relied upon. Where appropriate, the applicant should seek to maintain witness anonymity and ensure that witnesses are not identified by default (for example, through details of location, ethnicity, age or other personal characteristics).9.7.1. Access to court documentsUnder the Civil Procedure Rules24 a non-party may obtain from the courts records a copy of a “statement of case” but not any document filed with or attached to it. Access to any document, other than the “statement of case” requires the permission of the court. Permission must be applied for, by way of a Part 23 application.25Where a case is transferred to the County Court or High Court on the respondent’s reaching the age of 18, anything done in or in relation to the case in the Youth Court will have effect as if it had been done in the County or the High Court.26 The originating process in the Youth Court (the application) would fall to be treated as if it had been the originating process (the claim form) in the County or High Court. That is, the Youth Court application is therefore considered to be a “statement of case”. Anything else in the file would fall outside the general rule and would require permission of the court for a non-party to have access to it.9.7.2. Reporting restrictionsGang injunction proceedings in the Youth Court are subject to automatic reporting restrictions by virtue of section 49 of the Children and Young Persons Act 1933 (CYPA). However, section 49 does allow certain matters to be reported in relation to a child or young person so long as this is not likely to lead members of the public to identify them as someone concerned in proceedings.2724 Paragraph (1) of rule 5.4C25 Rule 5.4D26 Paragraph 1A of Practice Direction 6527 Available at https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/421538/moj- circular-youth-reporting-restrictions.pdf34
Statutory Guidance Injunctions to Prevent Gang-Related Violence and Gang-Related Drug Dealing9.7.3. Public Interest Immunity applicationsAll evidence which is to be relied upon during an application must be disclosed to the other side. The only exception to this is in cases where a Public Interest Immunity (‘PII’) application has been made and granted. A PII application must be made in accordance with Rule 31.19 of the Civil Procedure Rules, which enables an application to be made, ‘without notice’, for an order permitting the applicant to withhold disclosure of a document on the ground that disclosure would damage the public interest. PII applications must present a considered case as to why disclosure of the particular document would damage the public interest. Where possible, injunction applicants should consider whether a PII application is appropriate well in advance of court hearings.9.8. Legal aid for respondentsLegally aided representation for respondents is available as part of the civil legal aid scheme, subject to means and merits tests. A solicitor, or a member of a law centre or Citizens Advice Bureau, will be able to advise respondents whether they are eligible for legal aid funding.Applicants can also check their financial eligibility for legal aid by using the online eligibility calculator, which is available at www.justice.gov.uk/legal-aid. If a solicitor is willing to act for the respondent, they will be able to apply for funding on their behalf. The civil legal aid scheme is administered by the Legal Aid Agency.Information about which solicitors undertake legally aided work can be found via the Civil Legal Advice service, by calling 0845 345 4 345, or visiting www.legaladviserfinder.justice.gov.uk. Respondents may also find it helpful to visit the Citizens’ Advice Bureau, consult local information directories or the Yellow Pages. Another source of information about solicitors is the Solicitors’ Regional Directory. The Law Society also provides a database of solicitors, which can be accessed by visiting www.lawsociety.org.uk/ http:///or by calling 0207 242 1222.35
Statutory Guidance Injunctions to Prevent Gang-Related Violence and Gang-Related Drug Dealing10. Serving the injunction10.1. Serving the injunction on the respondentOnce an injunction has been granted, it must be served personally on the respondent, unless the court orders otherwise.If applicants obtain the injunction at a hearing where the respondent is present, they should consider asking the court to order that the respondent remain on the court premises until he or she is served with the injunction. This should reduce the time spent trying to locate the respondent later on and means that it is less likely that service will become a live issue at a later hearing.It is essential that the respondent understands the nature and precise details of the terms of the injunction and that the terms are explained in ordinary language. In particular, it is good practice at the initial meeting to provide the respondent with a series of pre-planned appointments, detailing times and locations. The respondent should be notified in writing of any amendments to appointment, location or times. It is also good practice to provide a map which clearly shows any exclusion zones. It may be appropriate for the police (either as the applicant or on behalf of a local authority applicant) to drive the respondent around the restricted area, physically pointing out the areas named in their injunction. If the applicant is the local authority, this step should be taken in collaboration with the police, ensuring that adequate security measures are in place.Where a respondent has not been personally served with the injunction at the court, applicants will be responsible for arranging personal service as soon as possible thereafter.In ‘without notice’ hearings, proof of service of an injunction is important since any proceedings for breach may fail if service is challenged by the respondent and cannot be proved by the applicant.Consultation partners should be informed when an injunction has been served on the respondent.When serving an injunction on a respondent aged 14 to 17, the applicant must comply with any directions given to them under the terms of the court order relating to service in the presence of a responsible adult/appropriate adult. An appropriate adult, for example, may be a parent, guardian, local authority social worker, someone from a voluntary organisation or some other responsible adult aged 18 or over who is not a police officer or employed by the police. Normal YOT arrangements to provide appropriate adults for young people in police custody should apply.YOT arrangements to provide appropriate adults for young people in police custody, already exist. Consideration should be given at the consultation stage to determine whether these services can be used to support the serving of an injunction to a young person.36
Statutory Guidance Injunctions to Prevent Gang-Related Violence and Gang-Related Drug Dealing10.2. Inputting information into the Police National Computer (PNC)The recording of injunctions on the PNC will assist police forces in enforcing breaches effectively. After an injunction has been issued by a court, the relevant police force (either as the injunction applicant or on behalf of a local authority applicant) should input the injunction on the Wanted/Missing page of the PNC as a ‘Gang Related Violence Injunction’. If the applicant is a local authority, they should ensure that the relevant police force is notified with this information as soon as possible after the injunction is issued. Applicants can assist by ensuring copies of court orders are provided to the police without delay. It is vital that information is correctly entered and kept up- to-date, particularly when a power of arrest is attached to some but not all of the conditions of the injunction. Guidance on entering details of an injunction into PNC can be found in the PNC handbook, available from PNC liaison officers.Applicants should be aware that a respondent’s record of being subject to a gang injunction may be disclosed under certain circumstances. An enhanced criminal record certificate issued by the Disclosure and Barring Service could disclose this information if the local police force considered it relevant to the purpose of an application for a criminal records check, and appropriate for the employer to know.37
Statutory Guidance Injunctions to Prevent Gang-Related Violence and Gang-Related Drug Dealing11. Variation, discharge and review of injunctionsThe 2009 Act contains provisions for the variation, discharge and review of injunctions.28 The court has the power to vary or discharge an injunction at a review hearing, or upon application by either the respondent or the applicant. The applicant should keep the injunction under active review, and update the case file accordingly, so as to allow applications for variation or discharge to be made effectively. The injunction applicant should notify the people and organisations they consulted as part of the application process. If the court orders a variation or discharge of an injunction, the applicant should immediately inform their police and local authority partners and deliver a copy of this order to them. If an application to vary or discharge an injunction is dismissed, no further application to vary or discharge it may be made by any person without the consent of the court.11.1. Variation of an injunctionApplicants may consider applying to vary an injunction in response to changes in the respondent’s behaviour and activities, including changes in their associations and the places in which they are suspected of engaging in gang-related activity. The powers of the court to vary an injunction include:29ï to include an additional prohibition or requirement in the injunction;ï to extend the period for which a prohibition or requirement has effect; andï to attach a power of arrest or extend the period for which a power of arrest attached to the injunction has effect.When applying to vary an injunction by placing an additional prohibition or requirement on the respondent, applicants must show that the variation is necessary, either to prevent the respondent from engaging in, or being a victim of, gang-related violence or gang-related drug dealing.Applicants may apply for a variation of the injunction without giving notice to the respondent, but must state in the application why it was necessary not to give notice.3011.2. Discharge of an injunctionAn application may also be made by the applicant or respondent to discharge an injunction. Applicants should consider applying to discharge an injunction when they believe the aims of the injunction have been met. This will be when the injunction is deemed no longer necessary to prevent the respondent from engaging in, encouraging or assisting gang-related violence or gang- related drug dealing, or to protect the respondent from such violence or criminality. The court will need to see evidence that this is the case. Progress the respondent has made in improving their behaviour, refraining from criminal activity and exiting the gang lifestyle should be gathered.Applicants can apply to discharge the injunction without giving notice to the respondent but should state in the application why notice has not been given.3128 As amended by section 37 of the Crime and Security Act 2010.29 Section 42(3) of the Policing and Crime Act 2009.30 CPR 65.45.31 CPR 65.45.38
Statutory Guidance Injunctions to Prevent Gang-Related Violence and Gang-Related Drug Dealing11.3. Review of an injunctionApplicants should be aware of the review provisions contained in the 2009 Act. A review hearing is held for the purpose of considering whether an injunction should be varied or discharged. Review hearings may be scheduled for the following reasons:ï courts have the power to schedule a review hearing(s) of their own motion, in which case the applicant and respondent are ordered to attend one or more hearings on specified dates.32ï if any prohibition or requirement of an injunction has effect for longer than one year, the court must order a review hearing and schedule it to be held within the last four weeks of the one year period.33Applicants should be prepared to present their position as to whether an injunction should be varied or discharged, drawing upon the information they have compiled in the case file. If the applicant opposes the discharge of an injunction, they will need to convince the court that the injunction remains necessary to prevent gang-related violence or gang-related drug dealing; if the applicant opposes variation, they will need to convince the court that the injunction remains necessary in its present form.11.3.1. Injunctions for applicants aged 14 to 17 years old: Mandatory review of InjunctionsApplicants should be aware that where a respondent is aged 14 to 17, there is a mandatory review process if any condition of the injunction will still be in force past the respondent’s 18th birthday, as set out in section 36 of the 2009 Act. The purpose of this provision is to ensure that any conditions attached to the injunction remain relevant and enforceable once the respondent has reached the age of 18. It may be necessary at this stage to vary the conditions attached to the injunction in order to reflect the range of disposals available in respect of an adult respondent. The applicant should ensure that the YOT is consulted as part of this review.The review must take place within the four weeks following the respondent’s 18th birthday. This review is waived if there has already been a variation made to the conditions in the 4 weeks leading up to the respondent’s 18th birthday.11.4. Injunctions for applicants aged 14 to 17 years old: Transfer of proceedingsRule 16 of The Magistrates’ Courts (Injunctions: Gang-related Violence) Rules 2015 (Annex B) states that when a respondent reaches their 18th birthday, proceedings relating to an application for a gang injunction must remain in the youth court, unless the court directs otherwise. The court may of its own motion, or after being requested to do so by the applicant or respondent, direct that the proceedings are transferred to the High Court or the County Court, or direct that the proceedings are transferred to a youth court in a different area where the respondent currently resides for that other youth court to consider whether to direct transfer to the High Court or County Court.The court will not make a direction for transfer without a hearing on notice to both the applicant and respondent.32 Section 36(3) of the 2009 Act.33 Section 36(4) of the 2009 Act.39
Statutory Guidance Injunctions to Prevent Gang-Related Violence and Gang-Related Drug DealingUpon receiving such notification, the applicant or respondent as appropriate should provide a written statement that sets out the reasons why proceedings should either remain in the Youth Court or be transferred to the County Court or High Court. Any application should clearly set out their position as to whether transfer is desirable, having specific regard to the following criteria:ï The stage the proceedings have reached;ï The circumstances of the applicant and the respondent; and,ï The need to ensure fairness between the applicant and the respondent.Where proceedings which were commenced in a Youth Court have been transferred to the High Court or County Court after the respondent attained the age of 18, anything done in the Youth Court in or in relation to those proceedings will have effect, for the purposes of continuing the proceedings in the High Court or County Court, as if it had been done in the High Court or County Court as the case may be.Proceedings transferred to the County Court will be sent to the County Court hearing centre which serves the address where the respondent resides. This includes any information on the current case file.It is the responsibility of the injunction applicant to provide case information including special reports to the new court with all background information relevant to that injunction for hearing purposes etc. The Youth Court should also transfer the relevant case file to the relevant court.40
Statutory Guidance Injunctions to Prevent Gang-Related Violence and Gang-Related Drug Dealing12. Breach and enforcement of an injunctionBreach of an injunction of this type is not a criminal offence – it is dealt with as civil contempt of court for adults and by way of a separate statutory scheme for under 18s.34 However, if the respondent’s behaviour constitutes a criminal offence, it should be dealt with as such and applicants should work with the CPS and police (if a local authority) to pursue criminal proceedings.For an injunction to be effectively enforced, the police, local authorities and other appropriate partners, need to be aware of an injunction’s provisions and share information relevant to the case. This ensures that where breach of an injunction does occur, applicants are in a position to identify this breach and deal with it appropriately.12.1. Consultation between partners to monitor complianceApplicants will need to continue consultation with appropriate partners after an injunction has been granted to ensure it is managed and enforced effectively.It is advisable for applicants to circulate details of granted injunctions to these partners at the earliest opportunity. This will need to be done by secure means. The information should include, but is not limited to: the details of the injunction, including its prohibitions, requirements and powers of arrest; personal information about the respondent (so as to make them identifiable), and any other details relevant to the application.Partners should also be given proof that the injunction has been served on the respondent. Formal and informal processes should also be established for sharing information relating to any variation, appeal, review and discharge of injunctions. This means ensuring that all involved partners are kept informed of any changes to an injunction. Responsibility for ensuring the accurate, secure and timely sharing of information lies with the applicant. See Section 6 of this guidance for further details on consultation.12.2. Compiling evidence of breachOnce an injunction has been obtained, and where it becomes apparent that it is not being complied with, applicants should begin compiling evidence of breach in preparation for any breach hearing. Information to be presented and made available to the court during a hearing could include:ï written statements regarding the breach of the injunction;ï any other evidence regarding the breach of the injunction;ï a clear summary of any previous breaches of the injunction, what they were and how they were dealt with;ï any relevant authorities for sentence; andï a revised draft injunction should the applicant be seeking to vary the provisions.34 Schedule 5 of the Crime and Security Act 2010.41
Statutory Guidance Injunctions to Prevent Gang-Related Violence and Gang-Related Drug Dealing12.3. Bringing about breach hearingsApplication for a breach hearing is not mandatory upon breach of an injunction. The decision to pursue a breach hearing ordinarily rests with the original applicant. However, if the power of arrest is attached to an injunction condition, breach proceedings may ensue if the police arrest a respondent for breach of that condition as the court has power to hear contempt matters of its own motion. The case file should record the reasoned decision-making of the applicant from becoming aware of the breach until the final decision as to whether to bring proceedings for breach.In deciding whether to pursue breach proceedings, the applicant may want to consider:ï the seriousness of the breach;ï whether there have been any previous breaches;ï the progress the respondent is making towards the positive requirements contained in the injunction; andï the impact of a breach hearing and sentence on the aim of the injunction to prevent gang- related violence or gang-related drug dealing.Proceedings relating to an adultProceedings relating to 14 to 17 year oldsBreach proceedings relating to adults are heard in the County Court or High Court.Where a person aged 18 or over is brought before a judge following arrest for a breach of an injunction granted by a Youth Court, it is the responsibility of the injunction applicant to provide the judge with the information necessary to determine whether to deal with the matter or adjourn proceedings.If a person aged 18 or over is arrested for a breach of an injunction which was granted by a Youth Court, then he must be brought before a judge of the County Court.Breach of an injunction where the respondent is still under 18 years of age can be dealt with in different ways. The Youth Court can either make a supervision order or a detention order. Section 46A of, and Schedule 5A to, the Policing and Crime Act 2009 set out the specific requirements. When a young person is returned to court for breach of an injunction, the court must consider a report made to assist the court in that respect by the relevant YOT.The court can only make a detention order if it is satisfied that due to the severity or extent of the breach that no other power available to the court is appropriate, and where it makes a detention order it must state in open court why it is so satisfied.42
Statutory Guidance Injunctions to Prevent Gang-Related Violence and Gang-Related Drug Dealing12.4. Power of arrestThe court can attach the power of arrest to any prohibition or requirement of an injunction, except for a requirement that the respondent participates in particular activities. If an applicant believes that the respondent has breached a requirement to participate in a particular activity they may apply to the court for a warrant of arrest.Where power of arrest has been attached, a police officer may arrest without warrant a respondent who is reasonably suspected to be in breach of that prohibition or requirement. Upon the arrest of a respondent, the applicant (if different from the arresting officer) must be informed and the respondent brought before the relevant judge within 24 hours.35 If the matter is not resolved, a respondent can be remanded in custody or on bail.12.5. Warrant of arrestIf applicants believe that the respondent has breached a term of the injunction to which a power of arrest has not been attached they may apply to the court for a warrant of arrest.36Proceedings relating to an adultProceedings relating to 14 to 17 year oldsIn the County or High Court, the applicant should complete a N244 form and pay the appropriate fee. Applicants should also file an affidavit explaining why a warrant of arrest is necessary and/or give oral evidence in support of the application at the hearing.37 Where oral evidence is given, the applicant must provide a written record of this evidence to the respondent upon their arrest.An application for a warrant of arrest may be made to court without notice by providing a complaint in writing under oath.35 Section 43(7) of the 2009 Act defines “relevant judge” as a High Court where the injunction was granted by the High Court and a judge or district judge of the county court where the injunction was granted by the county court.36 Section 44 of the 2009 Act.37 CPR Rule 65.46(2).43
Statutory Guidance Injunctions to Prevent Gang-Related Violence and Gang-Related Drug Dealing12.6. Breach proceedings, forms and feesProceedings relating to an adultProceedings relating to 14 to 17 year oldsBreach of an injunction is contempt of court which requires committal proceedings in respect of adults. It does not constitute a ‘criminal offence’.Application notice N244 must be filed to apply for an order of committal for breach of an injunction. Please refer to the current Order for the fee payable.38The requirements relating to personal service of the court order alleged to be breached are in CPR 81 and the accompanying Practice Direction as are details of the rules applying to applications for committal in county court proceedings.39An application for committal in the High Court or County Court must be made in accordance with CPR Part 81 and the accompanying Practice Direction40 This involves making an application for permission to make an application for an order of committal (when the application is made to a Divisional Court only); filing an affidavit alongside the application notice, setting out the name and description of the applicant; the name, description and address of the respondent; and the grounds on which the application for committal is sought.Evidence of breach should be disclosed in full to the respondent and their representative as soon as possible before the hearing, and there must be at least 14 clear days between the service of committal papers and the hearing.Where an under 18 is alleged to have breached any provision of an injunction, the applicant can decide whether to make an application for a supervision order or detention order in accordance Schedule 5A of the Policing and Crime Act 2009 (as amended).41Before making an application in writing to the Youth Court in accordance with Rule 10 of The Magistrates’ Courts (Injunctions: Gang- related Violence) Rules 2015,42 the applicant is required to consult with the Youth Offending Team and any other partners involved previously consulted when taking out the injunction. Please see latest order for fees payable.43The application should include evidence of the alleged breach and a statement indicating that the necessary consultation has been undertaken.Case law confirms that respondents are entitled to legal representation at hearings related to breach of an injunction order (should the respondent want to be legally represented) and the court may view any application to adjourn the hearing to obtain legal representation sympathetically.Applicants should be aware that the court may, at any hearing, dismiss the application, adjourn the matter to another date and/or issue case management directions in relation to a hearing.38 Schedule 1 Fee 2.6 and 2.7 Civil Proceedings Fees Order 2008. Available at http://www.justice.gov.uk/courts/fees39 Please see Annex D.40 Section 14(4A) of the Contempt of Court Act 1981 (as amended by the County Courts (Penalties for Contempt) Act 1983).41 http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2010/17/section/39 Please see Annex A42 Available at http://www.legislation.gov.uk/uksi/2015/421/pdfs/uksi_20150421_en.pdf43 Available at http://www.justice.gov.uk/courts/fees44
Statutory Guidance Injunctions to Prevent Gang-Related Violence and Gang-Related Drug Dealing12.7. Standard of proofFor a breach hearing, the standard of proof is beyond reasonable doubt.44 The applicant must therefore prove to the criminal standard of proof that the respondent has breached a term of their injunction. If the respondent denies they have breached a term of the injunction, the matter may be adjourned for witnesses to be called to give evidence. The applicant should be prepared to present clear and compelling evidence of the breach.12.8. RemandThe court has the power to remand a respondent in custody or on bail if, after that respondent has been arrested for suspected breach of an injunction (with or without warrant), the matter has not been resolved when the respondent is brought before the judge.45 The maximum time for remand in custody is eight days, unless the applicant and respondent both consent to a longer period. The applicant should be prepared to assist the court in coming to its decision and may be invited to make submissions as to whether a remand should be in custody or on bail.The court may also remand a respondent in custody or on bail if the court considers that a medical examination and report is required. If the respondent is remanded in custody for this purpose, the adjournment may not exceed three weeks at a time; if the person is remanded on bail, the adjournment may not exceed four weeks. The court has the power to make an order under section 35 of the Mental Health Act 1983 if it suspects the respondent is suffering from a mental disorder. Applicants should be prepared to assist the court if it has any concerns about the medical wellbeing of the respondent.44 Paragraph 1.4 of Practice Direction to RSC Order 5245 Sections 43(5) and 44(4) of, and Schedule 5 to, the 2009 Act.45
Statutory Guidance Injunctions to Prevent Gang-Related Violence and Gang-Related Drug Dealing12.9. Breach of injunctionProceedings relating to an adultProceedings relating to 14 to17 year oldsIn matters proceeding in the County Court or High Court breach of an injunction is dealt with by a civil contempt of court, which is punishable by up to two years in prison and/or an unlimited fine.46 Since the sentence is civil and not criminal, the respondent will not receive a criminal record for breach even if committed to prison.This is advantageous for two reasons: relatives and close friends of the respondent are more likely to give evidence against the respondent if they know the penalty for breach will not lead to a criminal record, and it allows for a more rehabilitative approach by avoiding the negative future impacts associated with a criminal record.However, see section 9.7 about potential future disclosure.Breach of an injunction by a respondent aged 14 to 17 can be dealt with in different ways. The Youth Court47 is given two specific powers in Schedule 5A to the 2009 Act (as amended): the power to make a supervision order and the power to make a detention order.The courts are required to take into account a number of considerations when deciding on the appropriate sentence for an under 18 year old, including consideration of the relevant YOTs’ report. In addition to broader considerations, such as the principal aim of the youth justice system - the prevention of offending, the welfare of the child and the sentencing guidelines (Schedule 5A, Policing and Crime Act 2009) sets out other considerations the court must take into account.Before an applicant can make an application to the court relating to the breach of an injunction, that applicant must have evidence of the breach of the injunction and must consult with the YOT consulted when the initial application was made (as well as any other person who was previously consulted at that initial stage).Before making any order under Schedule 5A the court must obtain and consider a report prepared by the YOT.12.9.1. Injunctions for applicants aged 14 to 17 years old: Supervision OrdersA supervision order may last for up to six months and contain one or more of three elements:ï supervision requirement;ï activity requirement;ï curfew requirement.Before the court may make a supervision order, it must consider a report made by the YOT for this purpose and obtain and consider information about the respondent’s family circumstances and the likely effect of such an order on those circumstances.Where a court imposes two or more requirements as part of a supervision order, it will be required to ensure that they are compatible. In any case, the court must consider whether any of the requirements interfere with the respondent’s religious beliefs, normal hours of work or education.A supervision requirement will require the defaulter to attend appointments with a responsible officer of the YOT at a particular time and place, as specified.46 Section 14(4A) of the Contempt of Court Act 1981 (as amended by the County Courts (Penalties for Contempt) Act 1983).47 Or County Court where the original injunction was granted in the Youth Court and the respondent has since turned 18.46
Statutory Guidance Injunctions to Prevent Gang-Related Violence and Gang-Related Drug DealingAn activity requirement may be made requiring the defaulter to participate in a particular activity or residential activity for a specified number of days within the period of up to six months for which the order is made. The total number of days on which an activity requirement is ordered must not be fewer than 12 or more than 24. A residential activity requirement may last for a period of not more than seven days.48 The court will need to be satisfied that facilities for the activity are present in the relevant YOT’s local area.A curfew requirement places an obligation on the defaulter to remain in a particular place for particular specified periods. Any curfew requirement must be for a daily period of not less than two hours and not more than eight hours on any given day. However, the order may specify different requirements of time or place for different days. Before specifying the place in which the curfew must be observed, the court must obtain and consider a report on the place proposed to be specified including information on the view of those persons likely to be affected by the enforced presence of the respondent.A supervision order which contains a curfew requirement may also contain an electronic monitoring requirement to enforce compliance with the terms of the curfew. Where such a requirement is included, the court will specify who is responsible for the monitoring the requirement. Where a supervision order contains only a curfew requirement with an electronic monitoring requirement, this will be the company which operates the electronic monitoring regime.49 Where a supervision order contains a curfew requirement in combination with any other requirement, this will be the responsible officer of the relevant YOT.In any case, the responsible officer must notify the terms of the curfew requirement to the respondent, the person responsible for the monitoring (if this is not himself) and any other person without whose co-operation it would not be possible to ensure that the monitoring takes place. This might include, for example, the parent or guardian of the respondent. Where such a person has been identified, an electronic monitoring requirement may not be included in the supervision order without that person’s consent.When a court makes or amends a supervision order, it must provide copies to the respondent and to the specified YOT. In the case that the supervision order contains an activity requirement relating to a particular place or activity or a residential activity, the court must also provide copies to the person responsible for that particular place, activity or residential facility. Similarly, in the case of an order which contains an electronic monitoring requirement, the person must provide a copy of the order to the person responsible for the monitoring and to any person (as set out above) without whose consent it would not be possible to ensure that the monitoring took place.Where a respondent has not complied with a supervision order, the responsible officer must inform the injunction applicant. The responsible officer may then refer this back to the court for prosecution of the breach. Where the court is satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the respondent has failed to comply with the conditions of the order, it may revoke that order and either make a new supervision order (possibly with more stringent conditions) or make a detention order.It is the responsibility of the responsible officer to ensure that any necessary arrangements are made to enable the respondent’s compliance with the order and to promote the defaulter’s compliance. The respondent is responsible for keeping in touch with the responsible officer and for notifying any change of address.48 Section 46A of, and Schedule 5A to, the 2009 Act (as amended by the 2010 Act).49 As set out in the Youth Rehabilitation Order (Electronic Monitoring Requirement) Order 2009 made under paragraph 26(5) of Schedule 1 to the Criminal Justice and Immigration Act 2008, referred to in paragraph 6(5) of Schedule 5A of the 2009 Act (as amended).47
Statutory Guidance Injunctions to Prevent Gang-Related Violence and Gang-Related Drug DealingEither the applicant or the respondent may make an application to the court to amend the time period of the injunction, or the geographical area to which it relates. Similarly, either party may make an application to the court for the order to be wholly or partially revoked. The court may grant such an application when, for example, the conduct of the respondent has been such as to suggest that this would be appropriate. However, once any application has been made and dismissed, no further application for revocation may be made by either party without the prior consent of the court.12.9.2. Injunctions for applicants aged 14 to 17 years old: Detention OrdersThe court may make a detention order against the respondent where it is satisfied that, in view of the severity or extent of the breach, that no other power available to the court is appropriate.Before making an application for a detention order, the injunction applicant must consult with the relevant YOT and the court must consider a report prepared by the YOT for that purpose. A detention order may last for not more than three months (beginning on the day when the order is made). Under a detention order, the respondent may be detained in:ï a secure training centre;ï a young offender institution;ï secure accommodation;50ï a secure college; orï a secure children’s home.The decision about where a young person is placed will be made by the YJB central placements team.51Either the injunction applicant or the defaulter may make an application to the court for the detention order to be revoked. The court may grant such an application where it is in the interest of justice to do so, having regard to the circumstances which have arisen since the detention order was made, for example, when the conduct of the defaulter has been such as to suggest that this would be appropriate. However, once any application has been made and dismissed, no further application for revocation may be made by either party without the prior consent of the court.50 As defined by section 23(12) of the Children and Young Persons Act 196951 Section 14(4) of Part 3 of Schedule 5A to the 2009 Act (as amended by the 2010 Act).48
Statutory Guidance Injunctions to Prevent Gang-Related Violence and Gang-Related Drug Dealing13. Appealing an injunctionAppeals may be lodged by both the applicant and respondent following the granting, refusal, variation or discharge of an injunction.Proceedings relating to an adultProceedings relating to 14 to 17 year oldsAppeals of decisions made by the County Court or the High Court are governed by Part 52 of the Civil Procedure Rules. Applicants and respondents should ensure they have read and understood the provisions of Part 52 and the supporting Practice Directions before seeking to file an appeal.Appeals against orders made by district judges in the County Court should normally be made to a circuit judge; appeals against orders made by circuit judges should normally be made to a High Court Judge.A young person may appeal a decision made by the Youth Court to the Crown Court under section 46B of the Policing and Crime Act 2009.Appeals to the Crown Court are governed by Part 63 of the Criminal Procedure Rules 2010.Applications for permission to appeal must normally be filed within 21 days of the court decision, or within any shorter period specified by the court. Applicants must also file a skeleton argument detailing the grounds for their appeal after filing the appeal notice (except in an appeal against a decision to refuse to grant an injunction under section 41 of the 2009 Act).13.1. Appealing an injunction made ‘with notice’In relation to ‘with notice’ injunctions, applicants must give notice of their appeal to the respondent as soon as possible and, in any event, no later than 7 days after the appeal is filed.13.2. Appealing an injunction made ‘without notice’In relation to ‘without notice’ injunctions, the applicant is not required to give notice to the respondent when appealing a court decision to refuse to grant an interim injunction (when the court has already adjourned proceedings).52However, the applicant is required to give notice to the respondent when appealing a court decision to dismiss an injunction application ‘without notice’ (when the court has already decided against adjourning proceedings).52 CPR 52.4(4)49
Statutory Guidance Injunctions to Prevent Gang-Related Violence and Gang-Related Drug Dealing14. Promoting awareness of gang injunctions14.1. Communicating the use or intended use of gang injunctionsApplicants may wish to communicate that they are using, or are intending to use, gang injunctions in the local area. Communicating this information may increase community confidence in the local response to gang problems, reassure the community that gang-related violence and gang-related drug dealing can be reported safely, and act as a deterrent against joining gangs or perpetrating violence or drug-dealing as part of a gang. General information about gang injunctions may be communicated through consultation partners, the local press and media, or any other appropriate medium.14.2. Publicising details of particular gang injunctionsPublicising the details of a respondent could put them at risk of harm from rival gangs and may breach their human rights. Applicants should take into account any court orders relating to disclosure and are encouraged to be mindful of the risks associated with publicity, to consider the value and appropriateness of publicity on a case by case basis, and to obtain legal advice about these and other data protection concerns before publicising these details. However, applicants may decide that the benefits of publicising a particular injunction are significant and that publicity is appropriate. The following considerations are important to this decision:ï Age – where the respondent is aged 14 to 17, applicants should be aware of the discretional reporting restrictions that may apply under section 39 of the Children and Young Persons Act 1933 to proceedings in respect of gang injunctions that are heard in the Youth Court. Section 39 provides that in any proceedings, other than criminal proceedings, the court may direct that reporting restrictions should apply.ï Safety – would public disclosure of the respondent’s name and other personal details generate risks to their personal safety (or that of family, partner(s) or associates) by, for example, identifying them with a particular gang and so risking reprisal attacks from rival gangs?ï Human rights – would public disclosure of a respondent’s details breach their human rights or cause data protection issues? The aims of the injunction and rights of the community should always be balanced against the rights of the respondent.ï Enforcement – would public disclosure of a respondent’s details reduce the likelihood of breach and improve enforcement?ï Deterrence – would publicity about particular injunctions act as a significant deterrent to other potential perpetrators? Would the respondent be less likely to breach the injunction and encouraged to leave the gang as a result of the community’s awareness about the injunction?ï Public reassurance – where sections of a community have been particularly affected by the behaviour of the respondent, they may be reassured that the police and local authorities are taking action against this violence or drug dealing.50
Statutory Guidance Injunctions to Prevent Gang-Related Violence and Gang-Related Drug Dealing15. Monitoring and review15.1. The importance of case file managementThe case file is used to record all available and relevant information pertaining to a particular injunction. This should include:ï the injunction, including all the prohibitions, requirements, duration and powers of arrest;ï personal information about the respondent, including their name, age, address, a recent photograph and summary of past conduct;ï a list of all involved partners, including individuals and their contact details;ï any publicity strategy developed by the applicant;ï breach information, including all reported evidence of breach and the reasoned decision(s) of the applicant as to whether to pursue breach hearing(s);ï information on the variation, discharge, appeal and review of the injunction; andï any other information deemed relevant to the injunction.Effective case file management is essential if accurate and current information about the respondent and associated injunction is to be maintained. Accurate information will support effective and efficient enforcement, information sharing and court proceedings. It will ensure against wrongful arrests and misinformation through publicity activities. The local authority, police and other partners should circulate new information for the applicant to add to the case file. It is the responsibility of the applicant to manage and update the case file.It is particularly important for up to date information on the injunction to be shared with the incoming court when a transfer has occurred from the Youth Court when a respondent has reached the age of 18.15.2. Post-legislative review of gang injunctionsSection 50 of the Policing and Crime Act 2009 required the Secretary of State to review the implementation of gang injunctions and table before Parliament a report on the outcome of this review within three years of their commencement. The review document was published on 11 February 2014 and is available at https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/review-of-the- operation-of-injunctions-to-prevent-gang-related-violence.15.3. Ongoing monitoring of gang injunctionsA post-legislative review of the Crime and Courts Act 2013 and Serious Crime Act 2015 will be required. To assist with this, police and local authorities should keep local records of the number and detail of applications made for injunctions, their outcomes and operational effectiveness.51
Statutory Guidance Injunctions to Prevent Gang-Related Violence and Gang-Related Drug Dealing15.4. Equality Impact AssessmentThere is a legal obligation to undertake an equalities impact assessment (EIA) in relation to race, disability and gender when public bodies are developing new or existing policies. In accordance with best practice, it is suggested that the following areas should be considered:ï race;ï disability;ï gender;ï gender identity;ï religion and belief;ï sexual orientation; andï age.In accordance with legal requirements, an EIA was published alongside the 2009 Act. A revised EIA was produced alongside the Serious Crime Act 2015.This statutory guidance has undergone checks from an equalities perspective to ensure the 2009 Act has not been interpreted in such a way as to discriminate against any group.52
Statutory Guidance Injunctions to Prevent Gang-Related Violence and Gang-Related Drug Dealing16. Consideration of the public sector equality dutyApplicants must also remember that, in accordance with section 149 of The Equality Act 2010, all considerations and decisions in relation to applications for gang injunctions should be made with due regard to the need to eliminate discrimination, harassment and victimisation, and advance equality of opportunity regardless of factors such as age, disability, gender, race, religion or belief or sexual orientation.53
Statutory Guidance Injunctions to Prevent Gang-Related Violence and Gang-Related Drug DealingAnnex APart 4 and Schedules 5 and 5A to the Policing and Crime Act 2009 (as amended by the Crime and Courts Act 2013 and the Serious Crime Act 2015):PART 4Power to grant injunctions34 Injunctions to prevent gang-related violence and drug-dealing activity(1) A court may grant an injunction under this section against a respondent aged 14 or over if the first and second conditions are met.(2) The first condition is that the court is satisfied on the balance of probabilities that the respondent has engaged in or has encouraged or assisted-(a) gang-related violence, or(b) gang-related drug-dealing activity.(3) The second condition is that the court thinks it is necessary to grant the injunction for either or both of the following purposes-(a) to prevent the respondent from engaging in, or encouraging or assisting, gang- related violence or gang-related drug-dealing activity;(b) to protect the respondent from gang-related violence or gang-related drug- dealing activity.(4) An injunction under this section may (for either or both of those purposes)-(a) prohibit the respondent from doing anything described in the injunction;(b) require the respondent to do anything described in the injunction.(5) For the purposes of this section, something is “gang-related” if it occurs in the course of, or is otherwise related to, the activities of a group that-(a) consists of at least three people, and(b) has one or more characteristics that enable its members to be identified by others as a group.(6) In this section “violence” includes a threat of violence.(7) In this Part “drug-dealing activity” means the unlawful production, supply, importation or exportation of a controlled drug.“Production”, “supply” and “controlled drug” here have the meanings given by section 37(1) of the Misuse of Drugs Act 1971.54
Statutory Guidance Injunctions to Prevent Gang-Related Violence and Gang-Related Drug DealingContents of injunctions35 Contents of injunctions(1) This section applies in relation to an injunction under section 34.(2) The prohibitions included in the injunction may, in particular, have the effect of prohibiting the respondent from-(a) being in a particular place;(b) being with particular persons in a particular place;(c) being in charge of a particular species of animal in a particular place;(d) wearing particular descriptions of articles of clothing in a particular place;(e) using the internet to facilitate or encourage violence [or drug-dealing activity].(3) The requirements included in the injunction may, in particular, have the effect of requiring the respondent to-(a) notify the person who applied for the injunction of the respondent’s address and of any change to that address;(b) be at a particular place between particular times on particular days;(c) present himself or herself to a particular person at a place where he or she is required to be between particular times on particular days;(d) participate in particular activities between particular times on particular days.(4) A requirement of the kind mentioned in subsection (3)(b) may not be such as to require the respondent to be at a particular place for more than 8 hours in any day.(5) The prohibitions and requirements included in the injunction must, so far as practicable, be such as to avoid-(a) any conflict with the respondent’s religious beliefs, and(b) any interference with the times, if any, at which the respondent normally works or attends any educational establishment.(6) Nothing in subsection (2) or (3) affects the generality of section 34(4).36 Contents of injunctions: supplemental(1) This section applies in relation to an injunction under section 34.(2) The injunction may not include a prohibition or requirement that has effect after the end of the period of 2 years beginning with the day on which the injunction is granted (“the injunction date”).(3) The court may order the applicant and the respondent to attend one or more review hearings on a specified date or dates.(4) If any prohibition or requirement in the injunction is to have effect after the end of the period of 1 year beginning with the injunction date, the court must order the applicant and the respondent to attend a review hearing on a specified date within the last 4 weeks of the 1 year period (whether or not the court orders them to attend any other review hearings).(4A) Where-(a) the respondent is under the age of 18 on the injunction date, and(b) any prohibition or requirement in the injunction is to have effect after the respondent reaches that age and for at least the period of four weeks beginning55
Statutory Guidance Injunctions to Prevent Gang-Related Violence and Gang-Related Drug Dealingwith the respondent’s 18th birthday, the court must order the applicant and the respondent to attend a review hearing on a specified date within that period.(5) A review hearing is a hearing held for the purpose of considering whether the injunction should be varied or discharged.(6) The court may attach a power of arrest in relation to-(a) any prohibition in the injunction, or(b) any requirement in the injunction, other than one which has the effect of requiring the respondent to participate in particular activities.(7) If the court attaches a power of arrest, it may specify that the power is to have effect for a shorter period than the prohibition or requirement to which it relates.Applications37 Applications for injunctions under section 34(1) An application for an injunction under section 34 may be made by-(a) the chief officer of police for a police area,(b) the chief constable of the British Transport Police Force, or(c) a local authority.(2) In this Part “local authority” means-(a) in relation to England, a district council, a county council, a London borough council, the Common Council of the City of London or the Council of the Isles of Scilly;(b) in relation to Wales, a county council or a county borough council.38 Consultation by applicants for injunctions(1) Before applying for an injunction under section 37, the applicant must comply with the consultation requirement.(2) The consultation requirement is that the applicant must consult-(a) any local authority, and any chief police officer, that the applicant thinks it appropriate to consult, and(aa) where the respondent is under the age of 18 (and will be under that age when the application is made), the youth offending team established under section 39 of the Crime and Disorder Act 1998 in whose area it appears to the applicant that the respondent resides, and(b) any other body or individual that the applicant thinks it appropriate to consult.(3) If it appears to the applicant that the respondent resides in the area of two or more youth offending teams, the obligation in subsection (2)(aa) is to consult such of those teams as the applicant thinks appropriate39 Applications without notice(1) An application under section 37 may be made without the respondent being given notice.(2) In this Part, such an application is referred to as an application without notice.(3) Section 38(1) does not apply in relation to an application without notice.56
Statutory Guidance Injunctions to Prevent Gang-Related Violence and Gang-Related Drug Dealing(4) If an application without notice is made the court must either-(a) dismiss the application, or(b) adjourn the proceedings.(5) If the court acts under subsection (4)(b), the applicant must comply with the consultation requirement before the date of the first full hearing.(6) In this section “full hearing” means a hearing of which notice has been given to the applicant and respondent in accordance with rules of court.Interim injunctions40 Interim injunctions: adjournment of on notice hearing(1) This section applies if-(a) the court adjourns the hearing of an application for an injunction under section 34, and(b) the respondent was notified of the hearing in accordance with rules of court.(2) The court may grant an interim injunction if it thinks that it is just and convenient to do so.(3) An interim injunction under this section may include any provision which the court has power to include in an injunction granted under section 34 (including a power of arrest).41 Interim injunctions: adjournment of without notice hearing(1) This section applies if-(a) an application without notice is made by virtue of section 39, and(b) the proceedings are adjourned (otherwise than at a full hearing within the meaning of that section).(2) The court may grant an interim injunction if it thinks that it is necessary to do so.(3) An interim injunction under this section may not have the effect of requiring the respondent to participate in particular activities.(4) Except as provided by subsection (3), an interim injunction under this section may include any provision which the court has power to include in an injunction granted under section 34 (including a power of arrest).Variation and discharge42 Variation or discharge of injunctions(1) The court may vary or discharge an injunction under this Part if-(a) a review hearing is held, or(b) an application to vary or discharge the injunction is made.(2) An application to vary or discharge the injunction may be made by-(a) the person who applied for the injunction;(b) the respondent.57
Statutory Guidance Injunctions to Prevent Gang-Related Violence and Gang-Related Drug Dealing(3) The power to vary an injunction includes power to-(a) include an additional prohibition or requirement in the injunction;(b) extend the period for which a prohibition or requirement in the injunction has effect (subject to section 36(2);(c) attach a power of arrest or extend the period for which a power of arrest attached to the injunction has effect.(4) Section 36(4) does not apply where an injunction is varied to include a prohibition or requirement which is to have effect as mentioned in that provision but the variation is made within (or at any time after) the period of 4 weeks mentioned in it.(4A) Section 36(4A) does not apply where an injunction is varied to include a prohibition or requirement which is to have effect as mentioned in that provision but the variation is made within (or at any time after) the period of four weeks ending with the respondent’s 18th birthday.(5) Before applying for the variation or discharge of an injunction, a person mentioned in subsection (2)(a) must notify the persons consulted under section 38(1) or 39(5).(6) If an application to vary or discharge an injunction under this Part is dismissed, no further application to vary or discharge it may be made by any person without the consent of the court.Arrest and remand43 Arrest without warrant(1) This section applies if a power of arrest is attached to a provision of an injunction under this Part.(2) A constable may arrest without warrant a person whom the constable has reasonable cause to suspect to be in breach of the provision.(3) If a constable arrests a person under subsection (2), the constable must inform the person who applied for the injunction.(4) A person arrested under subsection (2) must be brought before a relevant judge within the period of 24 hours beginning with the time of the arrest.(5) If the matter is not disposed of when the person is brought before the judge, the judge may remand the person.(6) In calculating when the period of 24 hours mentioned in subsection (4) ends, Christmas Day, Good Friday and any Sunday are to be disregarded.(7) In this Part “relevant judge”, in relation to an injunction, means-(a) where the injunction was granted by the High Court, a judge of that court;(b) where the injunction was granted by a county court, a judge or district judge of that or any other county court means a judge of the court that granted the injunction, except that where-a. the respondent is aged 18 or over, butb. the injunction was granted by a youth court, it means a judge of the county court.58
Statutory Guidance Injunctions to Prevent Gang-Related Violence and Gang-Related Drug Dealing44 Issue of warrant of arrest(1) This section applies in relation to an injunction under this Part.(2) If the person who applied for the injunction considers that the respondent is in breach of any of its provisions, the person may apply to a relevant judge for the issue of a warrant for the arrest of the respondent.(3) A relevant judge may not issue a warrant on an application under subsection (2) unless the judge has reasonable grounds for believing that the respondent is in breach of any provision of the injunction.(4) If a person is brought before a court by virtue of a warrant under subsection (3), but the matter is not disposed of, the court may remand the person.45 Remand for medical examination and report(1) This section applies in relation to a person who is brought before the relevant judge or the court under section 43 or 44.(2) If the relevant judge or the court has reason to consider that a medical report will be required, the judge or the court may remand the person under section 43(5) or (as the case may be) 44(4) for the purpose of enabling a medical examination to take place and a report to be made.(3) If the person is remanded in custody for that purpose, the adjournment may not be for more than 3 weeks at a time.(4) If the person is remanded on bail for that purpose, the adjournment may not be for more than 4 weeks at a time.(5) If the relevant judge or the court has reason to suspect that the person is suffering from a mental disorder within the meaning of the Mental Health Act 1983, the judge or the court has the same power to make an order under section 35 of that Act (remand for report on accused’s medical condition) as the Crown Court has under that section in the case of an accused person (within the meaning of that section).46 Further provision about remandsSchedule 5 (which makes further provision about the remand of a person under sections 43(5) and 44(4)) has effect.46A Breach of injunctions: supplementary powers in respect of under-18sSchedule 5A (which makes provision about the powers of the court in relation to breach of an injunction by a respondent aged under 18) has effect.Appeals46B Appeals against decisions of youth courts(1) An appeal lies to the Crown Court against a decision of a youth court made under this Part.(2) On an appeal under this section the Crown Court may make-(a) whatever orders are necessary to give effect to its determination of the appeal;(b) whatever incidental or consequential orders appear to it to be just.(3) An order of the Crown Court made on an appeal under this section (other than one directing that an application be re-heard by a youth court) is to be treated for the purposes of section 42 as an order of a youth court.Miscellaneous59
Statutory Guidance Injunctions to Prevent Gang-Related Violence and Gang-Related Drug Dealing47 Guidance(1) The Secretary of State must issue guidance relating to injunctions under this Part.(2) The Secretary of State may revise any guidance issued under subsection (1).(3) Before issuing or revising any guidance under this section the Secretary of State must consult the Lord Chief Justice of England and Wales and such other persons as the Secretary of State thinks appropriate.(4) The Secretary of State must lay any guidance issued or revised under this section before Parliament.(5) The Secretary of State must publish any guidance issued or revised under this section.(6) Each of the following must have regard to any guidance published under subsection (5)--(a) a chief officer of police for a police area;(b) the chief constable of the British Transport Police Force;(c) a local authority.48 Supplemental(1) ...(2) Rules of court may provide that an appeal from a decision of the High Court or county court to which this subsection applies may be made without notice being given to the respondent.(3) Subsection (2) applies to a decision applies-(a) to a decision under section 39(4)(a) that an application without notice be dismissed, and(b) to a decision to refuse to grant an interim injunction under section 41.(4) In relation to a respondent attaining the age of 18 after the commencement of proceedings under this Part, rules of court may-(a) provide for the transfer of the proceedings from a youth court to the High Court or the county court;(b) prescribe circumstances in which the proceedings may or must remain in a youth court.49 Interpretation(1)In this Part-”application without notice” has the meaning given by section 39(2); “consultation requirement” has the meaning given by section 38(2); “court” means the High Court or a county court;“court” (except in Schedule 5A)-(a) in the case of a respondent aged under 18, means a youth court, and(b) in any other case, means the High Court or the county court,but this is subject to any provision in rules of court that is or could be made under section 48(4);“drug-dealing activity” has the meaning given by section 34(7);60
Statutory Guidance Injunctions to Prevent Gang-Related Violence and Gang-Related Drug Dealing“judge”, in relation to a youth court, means a person qualified to sit as a member of that court;“local authority” has the meaning given by section 37(2); “relevant judge” has the meaning given by section 43(7);“respondent” means the person in respect of whom an application for an injunction is made or (as the context requires) the person against whom such an injunction is granted;“review hearing” has the meaning given by section 36(5);“specify”, in relation to an injunction, means specify in the injunction; “violence” includes violence against property.(2)	Any reference in this Part to an injunction under this Part includes a reference to an interim injunction.50 Review of operation of this Part(1) The Secretary of State must-(a) review the operation of this Part, and(b) prepare and publish a report on the outcome of the review.(2) The report must be published before the end of the period of 3 years beginning with the day on which this Part comes into force.(3) The Secretary of State must lay the report before Parliament.61
Statutory Guidance Injunctions to Prevent Gang-Related Violence and Gang-Related Drug Dealing            SCHEDULE 5 INJUNCTIONS: POWERS TO REMANDSection 46Introductory1(1) The provisions of this Schedule apply where the court has power to remand a person under section 43(5) or 44(4).(2) In this Schedule, “the court” means the High Court or County Court and includes—(a) in relation to the High Court, a judge of that court, and(b) in relation to a county court, a judge or district judge of that court.Remand in custody or on bail2(1) The court may—(a) [in the case of a person aged 18 or over] remand the person in custody, that is, commit the person to custody to be brought before the court at the end of the period of remand or at such earlier time as the court may require, or(b) remand the person on bail.(2) The court may remand the person on bail—(a) by taking from the person a recognizance, with or without sureties, conditioned as provided in paragraph 3, or(b) by fixing the amount of the recognizances with a view to their being taken subsequently and, in the meantime, committing the person to custody as mentioned in sub-paragraph (1)(a).(3) Where a person is brought before the court after remand, the court may further remand the person.3(1) Where a person is remanded on bail, the court may direct that the person’s recognizance be conditioned for the person’s appearance—(a) before that court at the end of the period of remand, or(b) at every time and place to which during the course of the proceedings the hearing may from time to time be adjourned.(2) Where a recognizance is conditioned for a person’s appearance as mentioned in sub- paragraph (1)(b), the fixing of any time for the person next to appear is to be treated as a remand.(3) Nothing in this paragraph affects the power of the court at any subsequent hearing to remand the person afresh.4(1) The court may not remand a person for a period exceeding 8 clear days unless—(a) the person is remanded on bail, and(b) both that person and the person who applied for the injunction consent to a longer period.62
Statutory Guidance Injunctions to Prevent Gang-Related Violence and Gang-Related Drug Dealing(2) Where the court has power to remand a person in custody it may, if the remand is for a period not exceeding 3 clear days, commit the person to the custody of a constable.Further remand5(1) If the court is satisfied that a person who has been remanded is unable by reason of illness or accident to appear or be brought before the court at the expiration of the period of remand, the court may, in the absence of the person, further remand the person.(2) The power mentioned in sub-paragraph (1) may, in the case of a person who was remanded on bail, be exercised by enlarging the person’s recognizance and those of any sureties for the person to a later time.(3) Where a person remanded on bail is bound to appear before the court at any time and the court has no power to remand the person under sub-paragraph (1), the court may (in the person’s absence) enlarge the person’s recognizance and those of any sureties for the person to a later time.(4) The enlargement of the person’s recognizance is to be treated as a further remand.(5) Paragraph 4(1) (limit of remand) does not apply to the exercise of the powers conferred by this paragraph.Postponement of taking recognizance6Where under paragraph 2(2)(b) the court fixes the amount in which the principal and the sureties, if any, are to be bound, the recognizance may afterwards be taken by such person as may be prescribed by rules of court, with the same consequences as if it had been entered into before the court.Requirements imposed on remand on bail7The court may when remanding a person on bail under this Schedule require the person to comply, before release on bail or later, with such requirements as appear to the court to be necessary to secure that the person does not interfere with witnesses or otherwise obstruct the course of justice.63
Statutory Guidance Injunctions to Prevent Gang-Related Violence and Gang-Related Drug DealingSCHEDULE 5A BREACH OF INJUNCTION: POWERS OF COURT IN RESPECT OF UNDER-18S   Section 46A Part 1 IntroductoryPower to make supervision order or detention order1(1) Where—(a) an injunction under Part 4 is granted against a person under the age of 18, and(b) on an application made by the injunction applicant, the court is satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the person is in breach of any provision of the injunction,the court may make one of the orders specified in sub-paragraph (2) in respect of the person.(2) Those orders are—(a) a supervision order (see Part 2 of this Schedule);(b) a detention order (see Part 3 of this Schedule).(3) The powers conferred by this paragraph are in addition to any other power of the court in relation to the breach of the injunction.(4) Before making an application under paragraph 1(1)(b) the injunction applicant must consult—(a) the youth offending team consulted under section 38(1) or 39(5) in relation to the injunction, and(b) any other person previously so consulted.(5) In considering whether and how to exercise its powers under this paragraph, the court must consider a report made to assist the court in that respect by the youth offending team referred to in sub-paragraph (4)(a).(6) An order under sub-paragraph (1) may not be made in respect of a person aged 18 or over.(7) The court may not make a detention order under sub-paragraph (1) unless it is satisfied, in view of the severity or extent of the breach, that no other power available to the court is appropriate.(8) Where the court makes a detention order under sub-paragraph (1) it must state in open court why it is satisfied as specified in sub-paragraph (7).(9) In this Schedule—“defaulter”, in relation to an order under this Schedule, means the person in respect of whom the order is made;“injunction applicant”, in relation to an injunction under Part 4 or an order under this Schedule made in respect of such an injunction, means the person who applied for the injunction;“appropriate court”, in relation to an order under this Schedule, means—(a) where the order is made by the High Court, the High Court;(b) where the order is made by a county court, a county court.64
Statutory Guidance Injunctions to Prevent Gang-Related Violence and Gang-Related Drug DealingPart 2 Supervision Orders Supervision orders2(1) A supervision order is an order imposing on the defaulter one or more of the following requirements—(a) a supervision requirement;(b) an activity requirement;(c) a curfew requirement.(2) Before making a supervision order the court must obtain and consider information about the defaulter’s family circumstances and the likely effect of such an order on those circumstances.(3) Before making a supervision order imposing two or more requirements, the court must consider their mutual compatibility.(4) The court must ensure, as far as practicable, that any requirement imposed by a supervision order is such as to avoid—(a) any conflict with the defaulter’s religious beliefs,(b) any interference with the times, if any, at which the defaulter normally works or attends school or any other educational establishment, and(c) any conflict with the requirements of any other court order or injunction to which the defaulter may be subject.(5) A supervision order must for the purposes of this Schedule specify a maximum period for the operation of any requirement contained in the order.(6) The period specified under sub-paragraph (5) may not exceed six months beginning with the day after that on which the supervision order is made.(7) A supervision order must for the purposes of this Schedule specify a youth offending team established under section 39 of the Crime and Disorder Act 1998.(8) The youth offending team specified under sub-paragraph (7) is to be—(a) the youth offending team in whose area it appears to the court that the respondent will reside during the period specified under sub-paragraph (5), or(b) where it appears to the court that the respondent will reside in the area of two or more such teams, such one of those teams as the court may determine.Supervision requirements3(1) In this Schedule, “supervision requirement”, in relation to a supervision order, means a requirement that the defaulter attend appointments with—(a) the responsible officer, or(b) another person determined by the responsible officer,at such times and places as may be instructed by the responsible officer.(2) The appointments must be within the period for the time being specified in the order under paragraph 2(5).65
Statutory Guidance Injunctions to Prevent Gang-Related Violence and Gang-Related Drug DealingActivity requirements4(1) In this Schedule, “activity requirement”, in relation to a supervision order, means a requirement that the defaulter do any or all of the following within the period for the time being specified in the order under paragraph 2(5)—(a) participate, on such number of days as may be specified in the order, in activities at a place, or places, so specified;(b) participate in an activity or activities specified in the order on such number of days as may be so specified;(c) participate in one or more residential exercises for a continuous period or periods comprising such number or numbers of days as may be specified in the order;(d) in accordance with sub-paragraphs (6) to (9), engage in activities in accordance with instructions of the responsible officer on such number of days as may be specified in the order.(2) The number of days specified in a supervision order in relation to an activity requirement must not, in aggregate, be less than 12 or more than 24.(3) A requirement referred to in sub-paragraph (1)(a) or (b) operates to require the defaulter, in accordance with instructions given by the responsible officer, on the number of days specified in the order in relation to the requirement—(a) in the case of a requirement referred to in sub-paragraph (1)(a), to present himself or herself at a place specified in the order to a person of a description so specified, or(b) in the case of a requirement referred to in sub-paragraph (1)(b), to participate in an activity specified in the order,and, on each such day, to comply with instructions given by, or under the authority of, the person in charge of the place or the activity (as the case may be).(4) Where the order includes a requirement referred to in sub-paragraph (1)(c) to participate in a residential exercise, it must specify, in relation to the residential exercise—(a) a place, or(b) an activity.(5) A requirement under sub-paragraph (1)(c) to participate in a residential exercise operates to require the defaulter, in accordance with instructions given by the responsible officer—(a) if a place is specified under sub-paragraph (4)(a)—(i) to present himself or herself at the beginning of the period specified in the order in relation to the exercise, at the place so specified to a person of a description specified in the instructions, and(ii) to reside there for that period;(b) if an activity is specified under sub-paragraph (4)(b), to participate, for the period specified in the order in relation to the exercise, in the activity so specified,and, during that period, to comply with instructions given by, or under the authority of, the person in charge of the place or the activity (as the case may be).66
Statutory Guidance Injunctions to Prevent Gang-Related Violence and Gang-Related Drug Dealing(6) Subject to sub-paragraph (8), instructions under sub-paragraph (1)(d) relating to any day must require the defaulter to do either of the following—(a) present himself or herself to a person of a description specified in the instructions at a place so specified;(b) participate in an activity specified in the instructions.(7) Any such instructions operate to require the defaulter, on that day or while participating in that activity, to comply with instructions given by, or under the authority of, the person in charge of the place or, as the case may be, the activity.(8) If the supervision order so provides, instructions under sub-paragraph (1)(d) may require the defaulter to participate in a residential exercise for a period comprising not more than seven days, and, for that purpose—(a) to present himself or herself at the beginning of that period to a person of a description specified in the instructions at a place so specified and to reside there for that period, or(b) to participate for that period in an activity specified in the instructions.(9) Instructions such as are mentioned in sub-paragraph (8)—(a) may not be given except with the consent of a parent or guardian of the defaulter, and(b) operate to require the defaulter, during the period specified under that sub- paragraph, to comply with instructions given by, or under the authority of, the person in charge of the place or activity specified under paragraph (a) or (b) of that sub-paragraph.(10) Instructions given by, or under the authority of, a person in charge of a place under sub-paragraph (3), (5), (7) or (9)(b) may require the defaulter to engage in activities otherwise than at that place.(11) Where a supervision order contains an activity requirement, the appropriate court may on the application of the injunction applicant or the defaulter amend the order by substituting for any number of days, place, activity, period or description of persons specified in the order a new number of days, place, activity, period or description (subject, in the case of a number of days, to sub-paragraph (2)).(12) A court may only include an activity requirement in a supervision order or vary such a requirement under sub-paragraph (11) if—(a) it has consulted the youth offending team which is to be, or is, specified in the order,(b) it is satisfied that it is feasible to secure compliance with the requirement or requirement as varied,(c) it is satisfied that provision for the defaulter to participate in the activities proposed can be made under the arrangements for persons to participate in such activities which exist in the area of the youth offending team which is to be or is specified in the order, and(d) in a case where the requirement or requirement as varied would involve the co- operation of a person other than the defaulter and the responsible officer, that person consents to its inclusion or variation.(13) For the purposes of sub-paragraph (9) “guardian” has the same meaning as in the Children and Young Persons Act 1933 (subject to sub-paragraph (14)).67
Statutory Guidance Injunctions to Prevent Gang-Related Violence and Gang-Related Drug Dealing(14) If a local authority has parental responsibility for a defaulter who is in its care or provided with accommodation by it in the exercise of any social services functions, the reference to “guardian” in sub-paragraph (9) is to be read as a reference to that authority.(15) In sub-paragraph (14)—(a) “parental responsibility” has the same meaning as it has in the Children Act 1989 by virtue of section 3 of that Act;(b) “social services functions” has the same meaning as it has in the Local Authority Social Services Act 1970 by virtue of section 1A of that Act.Curfew requirements5(1) In this Schedule, “curfew requirement”, in relation to a supervision order, means a requirement that the defaulter remain, for periods specified in the order, at a place so specified.(2) A supervision order imposing a curfew requirement may specify different places or different periods for different days.(3) The periods specified under sub-paragraph (1)—(a) must be within the period for the time being specified in the order under paragraph 2(5);(b) may not amount to less than two or more than eight hours in any day.(4) Before specifying a place under sub-paragraph (1) in a supervision order, the court making the order must obtain and consider information about the place proposed to be specified in the order (including information as to the attitude of persons likely to be affected by the enforced presence there of the defaulter).(5) Where a supervision order contains a curfew requirement, the appropriate court may, on the application of the injunction applicant or the defaulter amend the order by—(a) substituting new periods for the periods specified in the order under this paragraph (subject to sub-paragraph (3)); or(b) substituting a new place for the place specified in the order under this paragraph (subject to sub-paragraph (4)).Electronic monitoring requirements6(1) A supervision order containing a curfew requirement may also contain a requirement (an “electronic monitoring requirement”) for securing the electronic monitoring of compliance with the curfew requirement during a period—(a) specified in the order, or(b) determined by the responsible officer in accordance with the order.68
Statutory Guidance Injunctions to Prevent Gang-Related Violence and Gang-Related Drug Dealing(2) In a case referred to in sub-paragraph (1)(b), the responsible officer must, before the beginning of the period when the electronic monitoring requirement is to take effect, notify—(a) the defaulter,(b) the person responsible for the monitoring, and(c) any person falling within sub-paragraph (3)(b), of the time when that period is to begin.(3) Where—(a) it is proposed to include an electronic monitoring requirement in a supervision order, but(b) there is a person (other than the defaulter) without whose co-operation it will not be practicable to secure that the monitoring takes place,the requirement may not be included in the order without that person’s consent.(4) A supervision order imposing an electronic monitoring requirement must include provision for making a person responsible for the monitoring.(5) The person who is made responsible for the monitoring must be of a description specified in an order under paragraph 26(5) of Schedule 1 to the Criminal Justice and Immigration Act 2008.(6) An electronic monitoring requirement may not be included in a supervision order unless the court making the order—(a) has been notified by the youth offending team for the time being specified in the order that arrangements for electronic monitoring are available in the area where the place which the court proposes to specify in the order for the purposes of the curfew requirement is situated, and(b) is satisfied that the necessary provision can be made under the arrangements currently available.(7) Where a supervision order contains an electronic monitoring requirement, the appropriate court may, on the application of the injunction applicant or the defaulter, amend the order by substituting a new period for the period specified in the order under this paragraph.(8) Sub-paragraph (3) applies in relation to the variation of an electronic monitoring requirement under sub-paragraph (7) as it applies in relation to the inclusion of such a requirement.“Responsible officer”7(1) For the purposes of this Part of this Schedule, the “responsible officer”, in relation to a supervision order, means—(a) in a case where the order imposes a curfew requirement and an electronic monitoring requirement, but does not impose an activity or supervision requirement, the person who under paragraph 6(4) is responsible for the electronic monitoring;(b) in any other case, the member of the youth offending team for the time being specified in the order who, as respects the defaulter, is for the time being69
Statutory Guidance Injunctions to Prevent Gang-Related Violence and Gang-Related Drug Dealingresponsible for discharging the functions conferred by this Schedule on the responsible officer.(2) Where a supervision order has been made, it is the duty of the responsible officer—(a) to make any arrangements that are necessary in connection with the requirements contained in the order, and(b) to promote the defaulter’s compliance with those requirements.(3) In giving instructions in pursuance of a supervision order, the responsible officer must ensure, so far as practicable, that any instruction is such as to avoid the matters referred to in paragraph 2(4).(4) A defaulter in respect of whom a supervision order is made must—(a) keep in touch with the responsible officer in accordance with such instructions as the responsible officer may from time to time give to the defaulter, and(b) notify the responsible officer of any change of address.(5) The obligations imposed by sub-paragraph (4) have effect as a requirement of the supervision order.Amendment of operative period8(1) The appropriate court may, on the application of the injunction applicant or the defaulter, amend a supervision order by substituting a new period for that for the time being specified in the order under paragraph 2(5) (subject to paragraph 2(6)).(2) The court may, on amending a supervision order pursuant to sub-paragraph (1), make such other amendments to the order in relation to any requirement imposed by the order as the court considers appropriate.Amendment on change of area of residence9(1) This paragraph applies where, on an application made by the injunction applicant or the defaulter in relation to a supervision order, the appropriate court is satisfied that the defaulter proposes to reside, or is residing, in the area of a youth offending team other than the team for the time being specified in the order.(2) If the application is made by the defaulter, the court to which it is made may amend the order by substituting for the youth offending team specified in the order the youth offending team for the area referred to in sub-paragraph (1) (or, if there is more than one such team for that area, such of those teams as the court may determine).(3) If the application is made by the injunction applicant, the court to which it is made must, subject as follows, so amend the order.(4) Where a court amends the supervision order pursuant to sub-paragraph (2) or (3) but the order contains a requirement which, in the opinion of the court, cannot reasonably be complied with if the defaulter resides in the area referred to in sub-paragraph (1), the court must also amend the order by—(a) removing that requirement, or(b) substituting for that requirement a new requirement which can reasonably be complied with if the defaulter resides in that area.70
Statutory Guidance Injunctions to Prevent Gang-Related Violence and Gang-Related Drug Dealing(5) Sub-paragraph (3) does not require a court to amend the supervision order if in its opinion sub-paragraph (4) would produce an inappropriate result.(6) The injunction applicant must consult the youth offending team for the time being specified in the order before making an application under sub-paragraph (1).Revocation of supervision order10(1) Where a supervision order is made, the injunction applicant or the defaulter may apply to the appropriate court—(a) to revoke the order, or(b) to amend the order by removing any requirement from it.(2) If it appears to the court to which an application under sub-paragraph (1)(a) or (b) is made to be in the interests of justice to do so, having regard to circumstances which have arisen since the supervision order was made, the court may grant the application and revoke or amend the order accordingly.(3) The circumstances referred to in sub-paragraph (2) include the conduct of the defaulter.(4) If an application made under sub-paragraph (1) in relation to a supervision order is dismissed, no further such application may be made in relation to the order by any person without the consent of the appropriate court.(5) The injunction applicant must consult the youth offending team for the time being specified in the order before making an application under sub-paragraph (1).Compliance with supervision order11If the responsible officer considers that the defaulter has complied with all the requirements of the supervision order, the responsible officer must inform the injunction applicant.Non-compliance with supervision order12(1) If the responsible officer considers that the defaulter has failed to comply with any requirement of the supervision order, the responsible officer must inform the injunction applicant.(2) On being informed as specified in sub-paragraph (1) the injunction applicant may apply to the appropriate court.(3) Before making an application under sub-paragraph (2) the injunction applicant must consult—(a) the youth offending team for the time being specified in the order, and(b) any person consulted by virtue of section 38(2)(a) or (b).(4) If on an application under sub-paragraph (2) the court to which it is made is satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the defaulter has without reasonable excuse failed to comply with any requirement of the supervision order, the court may—(a) revoke the supervision order and make a new one; or(b) revoke the order and make a detention order (see Part 3 of this Schedule).71
Statutory Guidance Injunctions to Prevent Gang-Related Violence and Gang-Related Drug Dealing(5) The powers in sub-paragraph (4) may not be exercised at any time after the defaulter reaches the age of 18.(6) The powers conferred by sub-paragraph (4) are in addition to any other power of the court in relation to the breach of the supervision order.(7) The court to which an application under sub-paragraph (2) is made must consider representations made by the youth offending team for the time being specified in the order before exercising its powers under this paragraph.Copies of supervision order etc13(1) The court by which a supervision order is made must forthwith provide a copy of the order to—(a) the defaulter, and(b) the youth offending team for the time being specified in the order.(2) Where a supervision order is made, the injunction applicant must forthwith provide a copy of so much of the order as is relevant—(a) in a case where the order includes an activity requirement specifying a place under paragraph 4(1)(a), to the person in charge of that place;(b) in a case where the order includes an activity requirement specifying an activity under paragraph 4(1)(b), to the person in charge of that activity;(c) in a case where the order includes an activity requirement specifying a residential exercise under paragraph 4(1)(c), to the person in charge of the place or activity specified under paragraph 4(4) in relation to that residential exercise;(d) in a case where the order contains an electronic monitoring requirement, to—(i) any person who by virtue of paragraph 6(4) will be responsible for the electronic monitoring, and(ii) any person without whose consent that requirement could not have been included in the order.(3) The court by which a supervision order is revoked or amended must forthwith provide a copy of the revoking order, or of the order as amended, to—(a) the defaulter, and(b) the youth offending team for the time being specified in the order.(4) Where—(a) a copy of a supervision order (or part of a supervision order) has been given to a person under sub-paragraph (2) by virtue of any requirement contained in the order, and(b) the order is revoked, or amended in respect of that requirement,the injunction applicant must forthwith give a copy of the revoking order, or of so much of the order as amended as is relevant, to that person.72
Statutory Guidance Injunctions to Prevent Gang-Related Violence and Gang-Related Drug DealingPart 3 Detention Orders Detention orders14(1) A detention order is an order that the defaulter be detained for a period specified in the order in such youth detention accommodation as the Secretary of State may determine.(2) The period specified under sub-paragraph (1) may not exceed the period of three months beginning with the day after that on which the order is made.(3) In sub-paragraph (1) “youth detention accommodation” means—(a) a secure training centre;(b) a young offender institution;(c) secure accommodation, as defined by section 23(12) of the Children and Young Persons Act 1969.(4) The function of the Secretary of State under sub-paragraph (1) is exercisable concurrently with the Youth Justice Board.(5) A person detained under a detention order is in legal custody.Revocation of detention order15(1) Where a detention order is made, the injunction applicant or the defaulter may apply to the appropriate court to revoke it.(2) If it appears to the court to which an application under sub-paragraph (1) is made to be in the interests of justice to do so, having regard to circumstances which have arisen since the detention order was made, the court may grant the application and revoke the order accordingly.(3) The circumstances referred to in sub-paragraph (2) include the conduct of the defaulter.(4) If an application made under sub-paragraph (1) in relation to a detention order is dismissed, no further such application may be made in relation to the order by any person without the consent of the appropriate court.(5) Before making an application under sub-paragraph (1) the injunction applicant must consult—(a) in the case of a detention order made under paragraph 1(1), the youth offending team referred to in paragraph 1(4)(a); or(b) in the case of a detention order made under paragraph 12(4)(b), the youth offending team referred to in paragraph 12(3)(a).73
Statutory Guidance Injunctions to Prevent Gang-Related Violence and Gang-Related Drug DealingAnnex BList of key Magistrates’ Courts Rules, Civil Procedure Rules and Practice DirectionsThe Magistrates’ Courts (Injunctions: Gang-related Violence) Rules 2015 SI No. 421 (L. 4) The SI can be found at Legislation.gov.ukCivil Procedure Rule 65 (proceedings relating to anti-social behaviour and harassment) and Practice Direction 65Practice Direction 2B (allocation of cases to levels of judiciary) Civil Procedure Rule 21 (Children and Protected Parties)Civil Procedure Rule 30 (transfer)Civil Procedure Rule 52 (appeals) and Practice Direction 52 Civil Procedure Rule 5 (court documents)PART 81 - Applications and Proceedings in Relation to Contempt of CourtThese can be found on the Ministry of Justice website here: http://www.justice.gov.uk/civil/procrules_fin/menus/sched_ccr.htm www.justice.gov.uk › Courts › Procedure rules74
Statutory Guidance Injunctions to Prevent Gang-Related Violence and Gang-Related Drug DealingAnnex CGang Injunction (14–17 year olds)HMCTS Court Administration FormPOLICING AND CRIME ACT 2009 (AS AMENDED BY THE CRIME AND COURTS ACT 2013 AND THE SERIOUS CRIME ACT 2015) AND THE MAGISTRATES’ COURTS (INJUNCTIONS:GANG-RELATED VIOLENCE) RULES 2015 (Form – MC 200)ApplicantSpecify name, addressRespondentSpecify name, address, date of birthParent /GuardianSpecify name, address, date of birth and status as parent or legal guardianMatter of Complaint	Application for an Injunction to Prevent Gang-Related Violence will be made to:(PC09501)Name of Court	Youth CourtDelete as applicable	[on notice] [without notice]In accordance with Part 4 of the Policing and Crime Act 2009 (as amended by the Crime and Courts Act 2013 and the Serious Crime Act 2015) and the Magistrates’ Courts (Injunctions: Gang-related Violence) Rules 2015 on the grounds that:GroundsProvide brief details of the grounds that the applicant will rely on (supporting documents to follow)Terms of the Order  RequirementsProvide brief summary of the terms of order sought, including electronic monitoring, supervision and detention orders sought75
Statutory Guidance Injunctions to Prevent Gang-Related Violence and Gang-Related Drug DealingPart 4 - Youth Gang Injunction ChecklistComplaint for a Youth Gang InjunctionPolicing and Crime Act 2009 (as amended by the Crime and Courts Act 2013 and the Serious Crime Act 2015) and the Magistrates’ Courts (Injunctions: Gang-related Violence) Rules 2015Applicant’s Name & Address: Respondent’s Name & Address: Court Checking Officer/Date:ACTIONYESNOHas the applicant consulted with the police, local authority, youth offending team(s) etc prior to approaching the court?Does the risk assessment identify any risks to the safety and security of witnesses, staff, the judiciary and the public in the court building or the areas around the building?If yes, what steps have been taken or are recommended to reduce the risks to acceptable levels?Has the application been commenced in a Youth Court acting for the district in which the respondent resides or the conduct complained of occurred?Is the applicant seeking to apply to attach a power of arrest to a prohibition or requirement in the injunction?Does the application contain the respondent’s details?Does the application contain the respondent’s (youth’s) name, address and date of birth?Does the application set out the proposed terms of the injunction?Is the application made without notice? If so, the applicant must state the reasons why it is necessary for the application to be made without notice having been given.Has the applicant identified any security issues which may impact on the court’s risk assessment when handling the case?Has the applicant made the necessary arrangements with the local police to arrange for a police presence if necessary?Details of police contact point:Is access to special measures required for the purpose of the hearing? E.g. Facilities such as wheelchair access, sign language, witness screens, additional security provisions etc.Details of any special measures required and arranged by applicant and/or court:76
Statutory Guidance Injunctions to Prevent Gang-Related Violence and Gang-Related Drug DealingACTIONYESNOAre there appropriate witness facilities e.g. a separate waiting area, video link etc, available if required?Have arrangements been made to transfer the case to another court with the appropriate facilities if required?77
Statutory Guidance Injunctions to Prevent Gang-Related Violence and Gang-Related Drug DealingAnnex DThe Civil Procedure Rules and supplementary Practice Directions can be found on the Ministry of Justice website here:http://www.justice.gov.uk/courts/procedure-rules/civil78
Statutory Guidance Injunctions to Prevent Gang-Related Violence and Gang-Related Drug DealingAnnex ELinks to Form N16A: Applying for an injunction and Form N244: Application for notice (for breach, variation and discharge of an injunction) for Gang Injunctions against adultsThese forms can be found on the Ministry of Justice website here: http://hmctsformfinder.justice.gov.uk/HMCTS/FormFinder.do79

Home  Crime, justice and law  Knife, gun and gang crimeNews storyStricter age-verification checks for all knife retailersStricter age verification checks and a ban on doorstep drops will be introduced to greater protect young people from knife crime.From: Home O?ce and The Rt Hon Yvette Cooper MPPublished 28 January 2025Image: Getty ImagesThese new measures will also prevent weapons getting into the wrong hands.A stringent 2-step system will be mandated for all retailers selling knives online requiring customers to submit photo ID at point of sale and again on delivery. In addition, delivery companies will only be able to deliver a bladed article to the same person who purchased it.The government has an ambitious mission to halve knife crime within a decade as part of the Plan for Change and a core element of this will be addressing problems in the online sales space.Under the new measures a person may need to submit a copy of a photo ID such as driving licence or passport, as well as proof of address such as a utility bill, before showing ID again when the package is delivered. This could also include a person submitting a current photo or video of themselves to an online retailer alongside their ID.It will also be illegal to leave a package containing a bladed weapon on a doorstep when no one is in to receive it.Home Secretary Yvette Cooper said:“ It’s a total disgrace how easy it still is for children to get dangerous weapons online.“ More than two years after Ronan Kanda was killed with a ninja sword bought by a teenager online, too many retailers still don’t have proper checks in place.“ It’s too easy to put in false birth dates, parcels are too often being dropped o? at a doorstop with no questions asked.“ We cannot go on like this. We need much stronger checks – before you buy, before it’s delivered.“ The measures I am setting out today will be crucial in addressing this problem and are part of our Plan for Change and mission to make streets safer.”Last year the Home Secretary commissioned Commander Stephen Clayman, the national police lead on knife crime, to carry out a full review into the online sale and delivery of knives.The full report is expected at the end of the month and stronger ID checks are one of the recommendations.We have also already announced that we will hold social media executives to account for knife crime related content which glorifies and incites violence amongst young people. Senior execs of social media companies will face significant fines in the region of £10,000 for failing to swiftly remove knife crime related content from their platforms.The measures announced today are set to be included as part of the Crime and Policing Bill which is expected to be introduced to Parliament by spring, with more proposals still to come in the coming weeks.Share this pageThe following links open in a new tab Facebook    TwitterPublished 28 January 2025Explore the topic Knife, gun and gang crime PolicingVictims of crimeYoung people and the lawServices and informationGovernment activityBenefitsEducation and learningDepartmentsBirths, death, marriages and careEmploying peopleNewsBusiness and self-employedEnvironment and countrysideGuidance and regulationChildcare and parentingHousing and local servicesResearch and statisticsCitizenship and living in the UKMoney and taxPolicy papers and consultationsCrime, justice and the lawPassports, travel and living abroadTransparencyDisabled peopleVisas and immigrationHow government worksDriving and transportWorking , jobs and pensionsGet involved
Serious Crime BillDelegated Powers – Supplementary Memorandum by the Home OfficeThe Government has tabled further amendments to the Serious Crime Bill for Lords Report stage; these include a new delegated power. This supplementary memorandum explains why the power has been taken and the reason for the procedure selected.New clause “Knives and offensive weapons in prison” – new section 40CA of the Prison Act 1952: Power to authorise possession in prison of a knife or offensive weaponPower conferred on:	The Secretary of State, governor or director of aprison or person authorised by themPower exercisable by:	(i) The Prison Rules made by statutory instrument                              (ii) Administratively Parliamentary procedure:	(i) Negative resolution (ii) None2. New clause “Knives and offensive weapons in prison” inserts new section 40CA into the Prison Act 1952 (“the 1952 Act”) which makes it an offence for a person to possess, without authorisation, a specified article inside a prison. The specified articles are any article that has a blade or is sharply pointed, or any other offensive weapon. New section 40CA(5) applies the authorisation regime in section 40E(1) to (3) of the 1952 Act as it relates to section 40D. The dis-application of the offence through an authorisation regime recognises that there are legitimate circumstances where it is necessary for persons in prisons (including prisoners) to have in their possession knives or other bladed or sharply pointed articles which, in other contexts, may constitute offensive weapons.3. Sections 40A to 40E of the 1952 Act currently set out a number of criminal offences which relate to certain articles being conveyed into or out of prisons, or being possessed or used within a prison, without authorisation. Under section 40B(1) it is an offence to bring a List A article (which includes an offensive weapon) into a prison without authorisation. Authorisation for this purpose is defined in section 40B(2) as authorisation given in relation to all prisons or prisons of a specified description, by prison rules or administratively by the Secretary of State and in relation to a particular prison, administratively by the Secretary of State or by the governor or director.4. Section 40C provides that it is an offence to bring a List B or List C item into or out of prison, without authorisation. Alcohol, mobile phones, cameras, and sound recording devices are List B items. List C articles include tobacco, money, food, and drink (as set out in the Prison Rules 1999 (SI 1999/728)). Section 40D provides for other offences in relation to prison security including that it is an offence for a person to take a photograph or sound recording inside a prison or transmit or cause to transmit, any image, sound or information, to convey a restricted document out of2. 
prison or to possess a mobile phone or similar, or a component part of a mobile phone, without authorisation. The meaning of authorisation for the purposes of section 40C and 40D is set out in section 40E.5. Section 40E(1) provides that authorisation means authorisation given in relation to all prisons or prisons of a specified description by the Secretary of State or by the Prison Rules and in relation to a particular prison by the Secretary of State, by the governor or director of the prison, or by a person working at the prison authorised by the governor or director. Section 40E(1) therefore differs from authorisations in respect of List A articles under section 40B(3) in that, in relation to a particular prison, authorisations may be given by persons authorised by the governor or director, as well as by the governor or director. Authorisations may be given to persons generally or to specified persons or persons of a specified description and on such terms as may be specified (section 40E(2)).6. The Secretary of State currently authorises the conveyance or possession of articles in relation to the existing offences through Prison Service Instruction PSI 10/2012 (Conveyance and Possession of Prohibited Items and Other Related Offences); these authorisations apply to all prisons1. Authorisations in relation to individual prisons may also be given by governors or directors and, except in relation to the conveyance of List A articles, by a person working at the prison authorised by the governor or director.7. As indicated above, new section 40CA(5) applies the existing authorisations framework in section 40E of the 1952 Act to the new offence. So possession of the specified articles may be authorised in relation to all prisons or prisons of a specified description by the Secretary of State or by the Prison Rules and in relation to particular prisons by the Secretary of State, the governor or director of the prison or by a person working at the prison who is authorised by the governor or director. The intention is that, consistent with current practice under section 40E, the Secretary of State will continue to issue authorisations in respect of all prisons, or prisons of a specified description, through Prison Service Instructions, and authorisations in respect of individual prisons will be issued where appropriate by governors or directors or a person working at a prison who is authorised by the governor or director.8. The delegation is considered necessary to provide for the flexibility to deal with operational issues as they arise. It would not be appropriate to set out authorisations on the face of the Bill as it is important to ensure these can be developed in response to operational issues and the constantly changing prison environment. As mentioned above, the intention is that in most cases authorisations will be issued administratively by the Secretary of State through Prison Service Instructions. This administrative mechanism is considered appropriate given the operational focus of any authorisation. As with the existing authorisation regimes under sections 40B and 40D of the 1952 Act, the authorisations applicable to all prison establishments to be specified under new section 40CA(5) will be generally be routine and reflect the reality that, in some specified circumstances, it will be1 http://www.justice.gov.uk/offenders/psis/prison-service-instructions-2012
appropriate to allow identified individuals to possess items such as blades within the prison environment. For example, in relation to the existing offence of unauthorised conveyance into or out of a prison of an offensive weapon, paragraphs 7 to 11 of Annex 2 to Prison Service Instructions 10/2012 confers authorisation on a number of specified classes of person, namely Sikh members of the Chaplaincy carrying the Kirpan, delivery drivers conveying into a prison knives, tools or other items that might be deemed offensive and police officers carrying an extendable baton or items of personal protection equipment. It is envisaged that possession of such articles within a prison would also be authorised for the purposes of new section 40CA(5). In addition, there are a range of other bladed or sharply pointed articles with everyday usages which would need to be authorised for the purposes of new section 40CA, for example kitchen knives when used for the preparation of food, work tools when used for their intended purpose in prison workshops or to maintain the fabric of a prison building, and razor blades when used for shaving.9. Section 40E(1)(ii) and (iii) of the 1952 Act, as applied by new section 40CA(5), enables an authorisation specific to a particular prison, to be given by the governor or director of the prison, or by a person working in the prison who is authorised by the governor or director to grant an authorisation on his or her behalf. There will be particular, usually occasional or one-off, circumstances where it will be necessary for a person visiting a prison to have in his or her possession a bladed or sharply pointed article or offensive weapon. In the interests of the efficient and effective management of individual prison establishments, it is appropriate that the decision to grant an authorisation in such cases is taken locally. Examples of such bespoke authorisations under the existing regime are setting out in Part E of Annex 2 to Prison Service Instructions 10/2012.10. In the interests of consistency with the existing legislative framework, new section 40CA also enables general authorisations applicable to all prisons to be included in prison rules. The power in section 47 of the 1952 Act for the Secretary of State to make Prison Rules is subject to the negative resolution procedure (by virtue of section 66(4) of the Criminal Justice Act 1967) and it is not considered necessary to change this position.Home Office7 October 2014
24/03/2025  Supporting materialhttps://www.college.police.uk/app/civil-emergencies/civil-contingencies/supporting-material PageSupporting materialThis page is from APP, the official source of professional practice for policing. First published23 October 2013 Updated3 April 2024Written by College of Policing Civil contingencies13 mins read Cabinet Office. (2004). The lead government department and its role – Guidance and best practice).  Cabinet Office. (2006). Emergency preparedness. Cabinet Office. (2006). Expecting the unexpected: Business continuity in an uncertain world.  Cabinet Office. (2010). Emergency responder interoperability: lexicon. Cabinet Office. (2010). Expectations and indicators of good practice set for category 1 and 2 responders. Cabinet Office. (2011). List of lead government departments’ responsibilities for planning, response, and recovery from emergencies. Cabinet Office. (2011). The role of local resilience forums. Cabinet Office. (2012). Civil protection common map symbology. Flood Guidance. (2024). Flood Guidance [internet]. [Accessed February 2024]  Cabinet Office. (2013). Local resilience forums: contact details. Cabinet Office. (2013). Preparation and planning for emergencies. Cabinet Office. (2013). Risk assessment: How the risk of emergencies in the UK is assessed. Cabinet Office. (2016). Human aspects emergency management: Guidance on supporting individuals affected by emergencies. Cabinet Office. (2020). National Risk Register 2020. Cabinet Office. (n.d.). Dealing with disaster: Revised third edition). Cabinet Office. (n.d.). Fact Sheet 2: National Security Risk Assessment.  College of Policing. (2013). Major investigation and public protection.  College of Policing. (2014). Code of Ethics College of Policing. (2023). Stay safe: Aide-memoire. College of Policing. (2023). Stay safe – Unarmed initial responders. Department for Communities and Local Government. (2016). Site clearance capability: A guide for effective local planning, response and recovery. Department for Communities and Local Government. (2017). The Bellwin scheme of emergency financial assistance to local authorities: Guidance notes for claims 2017 to 2018. Department of Justice NI. (n.d.). Office of the First Minister and Deputy First Minister (OFMDFM).
Disaster Action. (2008). Working with Disaster Survivors and the Bereaved: Code of Practice on Privacy, Anonymity and Confidentiality.GOV.UK. (n.d.). Air Accidents Investigation Branch. GOV.UK. (n.d.). Highways England.GOV.UK. (n.d.). Marine Accident Investigation Branch. GOV.UK. (n.d.). Rail Accident Investigation Branch.Health and Safety Executive. (2010). Striking the balance between operational and health and safety duties in the Fire and Rescue Service.Health and Safety Executive. (n.d.). COMAH – Guidance.Health and Safety Executive. (n.d.). Control of major accident hazards (COMAH). Health and Safety Executive. (n.d.). HSE and major accident hazard (MAH) pipelines. Health and Safety Executive. (n.d.). Pipelines health and safety.Health and Safety Executive. (n.d.). Radiation (Emergency Preparedness and Public Information Regulations 2001 (REPPIR)).HM Government. (2013). Emergency Response and RecoveryHome Office. (2004). Guidance on dealing with fatalities in emergencies.Home Office. (2009). ‘Guidance on the safe handling of contaminated fatalities’ (restricted, not hyperlinked).Home Office. (2015). The strategic policing requirement.JESIP. (2016). Joint Doctrine: The Interoperability Framework – Edition 2.JESIP. (2023). Initial Operational Response (IOR) to Incidents Suspected to Involve Hazardous Substances or CBRN Materials.JESIP. (n.d.). JESIP.National Highways. (n.d.). National Highways.National Police Chiefs’ Council. (n.d.). National Police Coordination Centre (NPoCC). Office of Rail and Road. (n.d.). Office of Rail and Road.Ordnance Survey. (2015). ResilienceDirect – Keeps UK crisis resilient. Ordnance Survey. (n.d.). ResilienceDirect.Ready Scotland. (n.d.). Ready Scotland.Scotland. Parliament. (2019). Cremation (Scotland) Regulation 2019.Scotland. Parliament. (2016). Fatal Accidents and Sudden Deaths Inquiry (Scotland) Act 2016.UK Government and Welsh Assembly Government. (2004). Concordat between the UK Government and the Welsh Assembly Government on the Civil Contingencies Act 2004.United Kingdom. Parliament. (2005). The Civil Aviation (Investigation of Military Air Accidents at Civil Aerodromes) Regulations 2005.United Kingdom. Parliament. (2004). Civil Contingencies Act 2004.United Kingdom. Parliament. (2015). The Control of Major Accident Hazards Regulations 2015. United Kingdom. Parliament. (1998). Coroners Act 1998.United Kingdom. Parliament. (2004). Fire and Rescue Services Act 2004. United Kingdom. Parliament. (1980). Highways Act 1980.United Kingdom. Parliament. (1999). The Ionising Radiations Regulations 1999. United Kingdom. Parliament. (1996). The Pipelines Safety Regulations 1996.United Kingdom. Parliament. (1996). Police Act 1996.United Kingdom. Parliament. (1984). Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984. United Kingdom. Parliament. (1984). Public Health (Control of Disease) Act 1984.United Kingdom. Parliament. (2001). The Radiation (Emergency Preparedness and Public Information) Regulations 2001.United Kingdom. Parliament. (2000). Terrorism Act 2000.Welsh Government. (2019). Wales Resilience Forum: What we do.
Back to Civil contingencies overviewTagsCivil emergencies
MenuHome Crime, j ustice and law  Crime prevention Firearms licensing : specifications for deactivated weaponsHome O?ce
ContentsGeneral principles PistolsRevolversSingle shot long firearms
General principlesGeneral Principles	Guidance NotesPrevent the disassembly of the firearms Appropriate measures includes the use of
Break actionRepeating long firearms Semi auto long firearms Automatic firearms Muzzle loading firearms
essential components by welding, bonding or by using appropriate measures with the equivalent degree of permanence.Depending on national laws, this process can be performed after the checking of the National Authority.
blind pinning using a hardened steel pin.Double submissions will be required in all cases where the certifying body cannot readily inspect the arm to ensure that all work has been carried out in compliance with the regulation.
Hardness of inserts: Deactivating entity The hardness of pins, plugs and rods should has to ensure that pins/plugs/rods used be = 40 HRC prior to welding. The onus is on have a hardness of at least 40 HRC and the submitter to ensure that the material that material used for welding ensures a sourced is of the correct hardness before
permanent and e?ective bond.Arms falling outside of the scope of the EU regulation should continue to be deactivated in accordance with ‘Specifications for the adaptation of shotgun magazines and the deactivation of firearms, revised 2010’.Arms deactivated prior to the introduction of the regulation submitted for re-certification can still be issued with a UK valid only certificate. It must be noted that should the arm subsequently be sold, exported or fall within the remit of the regulation in any way, it must be brought up to the specification of the EU regulation.Pistols
welding it on the firearm. A sample of each should be supplied for retention by the Proof Authority as spot checks will be carried out by them and other o?cial bodies.
1 Pistols (single shot, semi-automatic)  Guidance NotesPrevent the disassembly of the firearms essential components by welding, bonding or by using appropriate measures with the equivalent degree of permanence.1.1 Barrel: Cut a longitudinal slot through the barrel including the chamber where present (width: > ? calibre; length: for rifled barrels three times the length of chamber and for smoothbore barrels twice the length of the chamber).1.2 Barrel: For all pistols other than those with break action barrels a hole must be drilled across the chamber through both walls and through which a hardened steel pin must be inserted and securely welded (diameter > 50% chamber, min 4,5 mm). The same pin can be used to secure the barrel to the action.Alternatively, a plug of the size of the cartridge case must be inserted into the chamber and securely welded.1.3 Barrel: Remove the feed ramp where present.1.4 Barrel: The barrel must be permanently   In pistols where removal of thesecured to the firearm by welding, bonding or barrel requires the removal of
by using appropriate measures with the equivalent degree of permanence. The pin used in operation 1.2 can be used for this purpose.
the slide, this process may be achieved by the general provision of slide captivation.
1.5 Barrel: For exchange barrels not contained in Note - 1. 4 does not apply to1.1 
a pistol, apply operations 1.1-1.4 and 1.19 as applicable. In addition, the barrels must be
exchange barrels. Exchange barrels for pistols may only be
permanently prevented from being a?xed to a submitted as part of a factory firearm by cutting, welding, bonding or using set and not as individual
appropriate measures with the equivalent degree of permanence.1.6 Breech block/bolt head: Remove or shorten firing pin.1.7 Breech block/bolt head: Machine or remove the breech face at an angle of between 45 and 75 degrees as measured from the angle of the original face. Material must be removed across the entire breech face. All locking lugs must be removed or substantially weakened.1.8 Breech block/bolt head: Weld the firing pin hole.1.9 Slide: Machine or remove the breech face at an angle of between 45 and 75 degrees as measured from the angle of the original face. Material must be removed across the entire surface.
barrels; they should be serial numbered accordingly. Details of the barrels submitted will be recorded on the deactivation certificate of the firearm they are submitted with.
1.10 Slide: Remove the firing pin.	Remove or shorten the firing pin. If shortened, the firing pin tip must be at least 3mm below the deactivated breech face.1.11 Slide: Remove locking lugs in slide.1.12 Slide: Where applicable, machine the inside of This applies to pistols such as1.1 
the locking edge of the ejection port in the slide to an angle at a range of 45 to 75 degrees.
Glock, SIG and H&K USP where the barrel locks into ejection port as opposed to lugs within the slide.
1.13 Slide: If the breech block can be taken o? the This applies to pistols such as slide body, the deactivated breech block has SIG P22X and the HK P9S1.1 
to be permanently fixed to the slide body.1.14 Frame/Receiver: Remove feed ramp where present.1.15 Frame/Receiver: Machine away at least 2/3 of the slide rails on both sides of the frame.
where the breech block is a separate component.
1.16 Trigger mechanism: Ensure destruction of the As long as the physical link to1.1 
physical operating link between the trigger blade and the hammer, striker or sear. Fuse the trigger mechanism together with weld within receiver/frame, where applicable. If such fusion of the trigger mechanism is not
the firing mechanism is destroyed, it is acceptable for the trigger blade and any external hammer be left free to move. However, they must be
possible, remove the trigger mechanism and  independent of each other and
fill the area with weld or epoxy resin.1.17 Trigger mechanism: The trigger mechanism and/or housing has to be welded to the receiver/frame (in case of steel frame) or glued to the receiver/frame with high temperature resistant glue (in case of light metal or polymer frame).1.18 Automatic system: Destroy the gas piston, gas pipe and gas port by cutting or welding.1.19 Automatic system: If there is no gas piston, remove gas pipe. If the barrel is used as a gas piston, weld the deactivated barrel to the housing. In all cases where present, close the barrel’s gas vent by welding.
not linked in any way.This applies to pistols such as the Tokarev or SIG 250 where the trigger mechanism is housed in a separate unit dropped into the frame.
1.20 Magazines: Weld the magazine with spots or The term magazine refers to use appropriate measures with the equivalent detachable magazines only, degree of permanence, depending on type of NOT internal magazines such1.1 
arm and material to prevent removing the magazine.
as those fitted to K98, etc…
1.21 Magazines: If the magazine is missing, place It is acceptable to modify a spots of weld or use appropriate measures in magazine well by welding a1.1 
the magazine location or fix a lock to permanently prevent the insertion of a magazine.1.22 Silencer/Suppressor: Permanently prevent removal of the silencer/suppressor from the barrel by use of hardened steel pin or by welding, bonding or by using appropriate measures with the equivalent degree of permanence, if the silencer/suppressor is part of the weapon.1.23 Silencer/Suppressor: Remove all the inner parts where possible and their attachment points of the moderator so that only a tube remains. Drill holes that are of a diameter larger than the calibre of the firearm and at a longitudinal interval of 3 cm (short firearms) or 5 cm (long firearms) through the casing and penetrating the expansion chamber. Or else cut a longitudinal slot of minimum 6 mm from rear end to front end through the casing and penetrating the expansion chamber.
substantial pin that would prevent the insertion of an unmodified magazine yet would allow an empty, slotted magazine to be fitted.Removal of the ‘inner parts’ would not apply to moderators where ba?es are welded in place at manufacture.
Revolvers
2 Revolvers (including cylinder loading revolvers)Prevent the disassembly of the firearms essential components by welding, bonding or by using appropriate measures with the equivalent degree of permanence.2.1 Barrel: Cut a longitudinal slot (width > ? calibre; length: minimum ? the length of the barrel from the forcing cone).2.2 Barrel: A hole must be drilled through both walls of barrel (near the forcing cone) and through which a hardened steel pin must be inserted and securely welded (diameter > 50% calibre, min 4,5 mm). The same pin can be used to secure the barrel to the action. As an alternative, securely weld a fitting hardened steel plug (length: minimum half length of the cylinder’s chamber), into the barrel starting at the cylinder side.2.3 Barrel: The barrel must be permanently secured to the frame by welding, bonding or by using appropriate measures with the equivalent degree of permanence. The pin used in operation 2.2 can be used for this purpose.
Guidance Notes
2.4 Barrel: For exchange barrels not a?xed to the Note - 2.3 does not apply to1.1 
firearm, apply operations 2.1-2.3 as applicable. In addition, the barrels must be
exchange barrels. Exchange barrels for revolvers may only
permanently prevented from being a?xed to a be submitted as part of a firearm by cutting, welding, bonding or using factory set and not as individual
appropriate measures with the equivalent degree of permanence.2.5 Cylinder: Remove all internal walls from cylinder for a minimum of 2/3 of its length by machining. Remove as much of the internal walls from the cylinder as possible, ideally to the case diameter without breaching the external wall.2.6 Cylinder: Where possible, weld to prevent the removal of the cylinder from the frame, or take appropriate measures such as pinning, that render the removal impossible.2.7 Cylinder: For spare cylinders not a?xed to a firearm, apply operation 2.5. In addition, the cylinder must be permanently prevented from being a?xed to a firearm by cutting, welding, bonding or using appropriate measures with the equivalent degree of permanence.2.8 Frame/Receiver: Extend firing pin hole to three times of its original size.2.9 Frame/Receiver: Remove or shorten firing pin.
barrels; they should be serial numbered accordingly. Details of the barrels submitted will be recorded on the deactivation certificate of the firearm they are submitted with.
2.10 Trigger mechanism: Ensure destruction of the As long as the physical link to1.1 
physical operating link between the trigger blade and the hammer, striker or sear. Fuse the trigger mechanism together with weld within receiver/frame, where applicable. If such fusion of the trigger mechanism is not
the firing mechanism is destroyed, it is acceptable for the trigger blade and any external hammer be left free to move. However, they must be
possible, remove the trigger mechanism and  independent of each other and
fill the area with weld or epoxy resin.2.11 Trigger mechanism: The trigger mechanism and/or housing has to be welded to the receiver/frame (in case of steel frame) or glued to the receiver/frame with high temperature resistant glue (in case of light metal or polymer frame).2.12 Silencer/Suppressor: Permanently prevent removal of the silencer/suppressor from the barrel by use of hardened steel pin or by welding, bonding or by using appropriate measures with the equivalent degree of permanence, if the silencer/suppressor is part of the weapon.2.13 Silencer/Suppressor: Remove all the inner parts where possible and their attachment points of the moderator so that only a tube remains. Drill holes that are of a diameter larger than the calibre of the firearm and at a longitudinal interval of 3 cm (short firearms) or 5 cm (long firearms) through the casing and penetrating the expansion chamber. Or else cut a longitudinal slot of minimum 6 mm from rear end to front end through the casing and penetrating the expansion chamber.
not linked in any way.Removal of the ‘inner parts’ would not apply to moderators where ba?es are welded in place at manufacture.
Single shot long firearms
3 Single-shot long firearms (not break action)Prevent the disassembly of the firearms essential components by welding, bonding or by using appropriate measures with the equivalent degree of permanence.3.1 Barrel: Cut a longitudinal slot through the barrel including the chamber where present (width: > ? calibre; length: for rifled barrels three times the length of chamber and for smoothbore barrels twice the length of the chamber).3.2 Barrel: A hole must be drilled across the chamber through both walls and through which a hardened steel pin must be inserted and securely welded (diameter > 50 % chamber, min 4,5 mm). The same pin can be used to secure the barrel to the action. Alternatively, a plug of the size of the cartridge case must be inserted into the chamber and securely welded.3.3 Barrel: Remove the feed ramp where present.3.4 Barrel: The barrel must be permanently secured to the firearm by welding, bonding or by using appropriate measures with the equivalent degree of permanence. The pin used in operation 3.2 can be used for this purpose.3.5 Barrel: For exchange barrels not a?xed to the firearm, apply operations 3.1-3.4 as
Guidance NotesNote - 3.4 does not apply to exchange barrels. Exchange
applicable. In addition, the barrels must be barrels for single shot long permanently prevented from being a?xed to firearms may only be submitted
a firearm by cutting, welding, bonding or using appropriate measures with the equivalent degree of permanence.3.6 Breech block/bolt head: Remove or shorten firing pin.3.7 Breech block/bolt head: Machine or remove the breech face at an angle of between 45 and 75 degrees as measured from the angle of the original face. Material must be removed across the entire breech face. All locking lugs must be removed or substantially weakened.3.8 Breech block/bolt head: Weld the firing pin hole.3.9 Trigger mechanism: Ensure destruction of the physical operating link between the
as part of a factory set and not as individual barrels; they should be serial numbered accordingly.Details of the barrels submitted will be recorded on the deactivation certificate of the firearm they are submitted with.As long as the physical link to the firing mechanism is
trigger blade and the hammer, striker or sear. destroyed, it is acceptable for
Fuse the trigger mechanism together with weld within receiver/frame, where applicable. If such fusion of the trigger mechanism is not possible, remove the
the trigger blade and any external hammer be left free to move. However, they must be independent of each other and
trigger mechanism and fill the area with weld not linked in any way. or epoxy resin.3.10 Trigger mechanism: The trigger mechanism and/or housing has to be welded to the receiver/frame (in case of steel frame) or glued to the receiver/frame with high temperature resistant glue (in case of light metal or polymer frame).3.11 Silencer/Suppressor: Permanently prevent removal of the silencer/suppressor from the barrel by use of hardened steel pin or by welding, bonding or by using appropriate measures with the equivalent degree of permanence, if the silencer/suppressor is part of the weapon.3.12 Silencer/Suppressor: Remove all the inner  Removal of the ‘inner parts’parts where possible and their attachment would not apply to moderators points of the moderator so that only a tube where ba?es are welded in
remains. Drill holes that are of a diameter larger than the calibre of the firearm and at a longitudinal interval of 3 cm (short firearms) or 5 cm (long firearms) through the casing and penetrating the expansion chamber. Or else cut a longitudinal slot of minimum 6 mm from rear end to front end through the casing and penetrating the expansion chamber.
place at manufacture.
Break action
4 Break action firearms (e.g. smoothbore, rifled, combination, falling/rolling block action, short and long firearms)Prevent the disassembly of the firearms essential components by welding, bonding or by using appropriate measures with the equivalent degree of permanence.4.1 Barrel: Cut a longitudinal slot through the barrel including the chamber where present (width: > ? calibre; length: for rifled barrels three times the length of chamber and for smoothbore barrels twice the length of the chamber). For firearms without chamber included in the barrel, cut a longitudinal slot (width > ? calibre; length: minimum ? the length of the barrel from the forcing cone).4.2 Barrel: A tight fitting plug of at least 2/3 length of the chamber is to be securely welded into the chamber and should be positioned as close to the breech as possible.4.3 Barrel: Remove the feed ramp where present.4.4 Barrel: The barrel must be permanently secured to the firearm by welding, bonding or by using appropriate measures with the equivalent degree of permanence.4.5 Barrel: For exchange barrels not a?xed to the firearm, apply operations 4.1-4.4 as
Guidance NotesNote - 4.4 does not apply to exchange barrels. Exchange
applicable. In addition, the barrels must be barrels for break action firearms permanently prevented from being a?xed to may only be submitted as part of
a firearm by cutting, welding, bonding or using appropriate measures with the equivalent degree of permanence.
a factory set and not as individual barrels; they should be serial numbered accordingly. Details of the barrels submitted will be recorded on the deactivation certificate of the firearm they are submitted with.
4.6 Trigger mechanism: Ensure destruction of the As long as the physical link to physical operating link between the trigger the firing mechanism isblade and the hammer, striker or sear. Fuse  destroyed, it is acceptable for
the trigger mechanism together with weld within receiver/frame, where applicable. If
the trigger blade and any external hammer be left free to
such fusion of the trigger mechanism is not move. However, they must be possible, remove the trigger mechanism and independent of each other and
fill the area with weld or epoxy resin.4.7 Trigger mechanism: The trigger mechanism and/or housing has to be welded to the receiver/frame (in case of steel frame) or glued to the receiver/frame with high temperature resistant glue (in case of light metal or polymer frame).4.8 Action: Machine a cone of 60 degrees minimum (apex angle), in order to obtain a base diameter equal to 10 mm at least or the diameter of the breech face.4.9 Action: Remove the firing pin, enlarge the firing pin hole at a minimum diameter of 5 mm and weld the firing pin hole.4.10 Silencer/Suppressor: Permanently prevent removal of the silencer/suppressor from the barrel by use of hardened steel pin or by welding, bonding or by using appropriate measures with the equivalent degree of permanence, if the silencer/suppressor is part of the weapon.4.11 Silencer/Suppressor: Remove all the inner parts where possible and their attachment
not linked in any way.Removal of the ‘inner parts’ would not apply to moderators
points of the moderator so that only a tube  where ba?es are welded in
remains. Drill holes that are of a diameter larger than the calibre of the firearm and at a longitudinal interval of 3 cm (short firearms) or 5 cm (long firearms) through the casing and penetrating the expansion chamber. Or else cut a longitudinal slot of minimum 6 mm from rear end to front end through the casing and penetrating the expansion chamber.
place at manufacture.
Repeating long firearms
5 Repeating long firearms (smoothbore, rifled)Prevent the disassembly of the firearms essential components by welding, bonding or by using appropriate measures with the equivalent degree of permanence.5.1 Barrel: Cut a longitudinal slot through the barrel including the chamber where present (width: > ? calibre; length: for rifled barrels three times the length of chamber and for smoothbore barrels twice the length of the chamber). For firearms without chamber included in the barrel, cut a longitudinal slot (width > ? calibre; length: minimum ? the length of the barrel from the forcing cone).5.2 Barrel: A hole must be drilled across the chamber through both walls and through which a hardened steel pin must be inserted and securely welded (diameter > 50 % chamber, min 4,5 mm). The same pin can be used to secure the barrel to the action. Alternatively, a plug of the size of the cartridge case must be inserted into the chamber and securely welded.5.3 Barrel: Remove the feed ramp where present.5.4 Barrel: The barrel must be permanently secured to the firearm by welding, bonding or by using appropriate measures with the equivalent degree of permanence. The pin used in operation 5.2 can be used for this purpose.5.5 Barrel: For exchange barrels not a?xed to the firearm, apply operations 5.1-5.4 as
Guidance NotesNote - 5.4 does not apply to exchange barrels. Exchange
applicable. In addition, the barrels must be barrels for repeating long permanently prevented from being a?xed to firearms may only be submitted
a firearm by cutting, welding, bonding or using appropriate measures with the equivalent degree of permanence.5.6 Breech block/bolt head: Remove or shorten firing pin.5.7 Breech block/bolt head: Machine or remove the breech face at an angle of between 45 and 75 degrees as measured from the angle of the original face. Material must be removed across the entire breech face. All locking lugs must be removed or substantially weakened.5.8 Breech block/bolt head: Weld the firing pin hole.
as part of a factory set and not as individual barrels; they should be serial numbered accordingly. Details of the barrels submitted will be recorded on the deactivation certificate of the firearm they are submitted with.

5.9 Trigger mechanism: Ensure destruction of the As long as the physical link tophysical operating link between the trigger  the firing mechanism isblade and the hammer, striker or sear. Fuse  destroyed, it is acceptable for
the trigger mechanism together with weld within receiver/frame, where applicable. If
the trigger blade and any external hammer be left free to
such fusion of the trigger mechanism is not move. However, they must be possible, remove the trigger mechanism and independent of each other and
fill the area with weld or epoxy resin.5.1 Trigger mechanism: The trigger mechanism and/or housing has to be welded to the receiver/frame (in case of steel frame) or glued to the receiver/frame with high temperature resistant glue (in case of light metal or polymer frame).
not linked in any way.
5.11 Magazines: Weld the magazine with spots or The term magazine refers touse appropriate measures with the	detachable magazines only,equivalent degree of permanence, depending NOT internal magazines such as
on type of arm and material to prevent removing the magazine.
those fitted to K98, etc…
5.12 Magazines: If the magazine is missing, place It is acceptable to modify a spots of weld or use appropriate measures in magazine well by welding a5.11 
the magazine location or fix a lock to permanently prevent the insertion of a magazine.5.13 Magazines: For tube magazines, drive one or several hardened steel pin(s) through magazine, chamber and frame connecting them permanently to each other. Secure by welding.5.14 Silencer/Suppressor: Permanently prevent removal of the silencer/suppressor from the barrel by use of hardened steel pin or by welding, bonding or by using appropriate measures with the equivalent degree of permanence, if the silencer/suppressor is part of the weapon.5.15 Silencer/Suppressor: Remove all the inner
substantial pin that would prevent the insertion of an unmodified magazine yet would allow an empty, slotted magazine to be fitted.Removal of the ‘inner parts’
parts where possible and their attachment would not apply to moderators points of the moderator so that only a tube where ba?es are welded in
remains. Drill holes that are of a diameter larger than the calibre of the firearm and at a longitudinal interval of 3 cm (short firearms) or 5 cm (long firearms) through the casing and penetrating the expansion chamber. Or else cut a longitudinal slot of minimum 6 mm from rear end to front end through the casing and penetrating the expansion chamber.
place at manufacture.
Semi auto long firearms
6 Semi-automatic long firearms (smoothbore, rifled)Prevent the disassembly of the firearms essential components by welding, bonding or by using appropriate measures with the equivalent degree of permanence.6.1 Barrel: Cut a longitudinal slot through the barrel including the chamber where present (width: > ? calibre; length: for rifled barrels three times the length of chamber and for smoothbore barrels twice the length of the chamber). For firearms without chamber included in the barrel, cut a longitudinal slot (width > ? calibre; length: minimum? the length of the barrel from the forcing cone).6.2 Barrel: A hole must be drilled across the chamber through both walls and through which a hardened steel pin must be inserted and securely welded (diameter > 50% chamber, min 4,5 mm). The same pin can be used to secure the barrel to the action. Alternatively, a plug of the size of the cartridge case must be inserted into the chamber and securely welded.6.3 Barrel: Remove the feed ramp where present.6.4 Barrel: The barrel must be permanently secured to the firearm by welding, bonding or by using appropriate measures with the equivalent degree of permanence. The pin used in operation 6.2 can be used for this purpose.6.5 Barrel: For exchange barrels not a?xed to the firearm, apply operations 6.1-6.4 and 6.12 as
Guidance NotesNote - 6.4 does not apply to exchange barrels. Exchange barrels for semi auto long firearms may only be submitted as
applicable. In addition, the barrels part of a factory set and not as individualmust be permanently prevented  barrels; they should be serial numberedfrom being a?xed to a firearm by accordingly. Details of the barrels cutting, welding, bonding or using  submitted will be recorded on theappropriate measures with the  deactivation certificate of the firearm theyequivalent degree of permanence. are submitted with.6.6 Breech block/bolt head: Remove or shorten firing pin.6.7 Breech block/bolt head: Machine or remove the breech face at an angle of between 45 and 75 degrees as measured from the angle of the original face. Material must be removed across the entire breech face. All locking lugs must be removed or substantially weakened.6.8 Breech block/bolt head: Weld the firing pin hole.1.1 
6.9 Trigger mechanism: Ensure destruction of the physical
As long as the physical link to the firing mechanism is destroyed, it is acceptable
operating link between the trigger for the trigger blade and any externalblade and the hammer, striker or  hammer be left free to move. However,sear. Fuse the trigger mechanism  they must be independent of each other
together with weld within receiver/frame, where applicable. If such fusion of the trigger mechanism is not possible, remove the trigger mechanism and fill the area with weld or epoxy resin.6.10 Trigger mechanism: The trigger mechanism and/or housing has to be welded to the receiver/frame (in case of steel frame) or glued to the receiver/frame with high temperature resistant glue (in case of light metal or polymer frame).6.11 Automatic system: Destroy the gas piston, gas pipe and gas port by cutting or welding.6.12 Automatic system: If there is no gas piston, remove gas pipe. If the barrel is used as a gas piston, weld the deactivated barrel to the housing. In all cases where present, close the barrel’s gas vent by welding.6.13 Automatic system: Machine or
and not linked in any way.Remove all support on the breech face for
remove the breech face at an angle the cartridge head. As long as the breech of between 45 and 75 degrees as  face is removed, the breech block mass is
measured from the angle of the original face. Material must be
reduced by the required percentage and is permanently fixed in place, and the firing
removed across the entire surface pin is removed or shortened, it isof the breech face and elsewhere so permissable for the cocking handle to that bolt/breech block is reduced have independent movement. A de-by minimum 50 % of original mass. natured, scrap fragment of the breech Permanently fix the breech block to block separated from the bolt head and the firearm by welding; bonding or attached to the cocking handle may be by using appropriate measures with left free to move back and forth behind
the equivalent degree of permanence.
the main deactivated and fixed breech block/bolt mass.
6.14 Automatic system: In cases where Remove all support on the breech face for bolt heads are incorporated into a the cartridge head. As long as the breechbolt carrier, the carrier must be  face is removed, the breech block mass isreduced by a minimum of 50 %. The reduced by the required percentage and isbolt head must be permanently  permanently fixed in place, and the firingfixed to the carrier and the carrier  pin is removed or shortened, it ismust be permanently fixed to the permissable for the cocking handle to firearm by welding, bonding or by have independent movement. A de-
using appropriate measures with the equivalent degree of permanence.
natured, scrap fragment of the breech block separated from the bolt head and attached to the cocking handle may be left free to move back and forth behind the main deactivated and fixed breech block/bolt mass.
6.15 Magazines: Weld the magazine with The term magazine refers to detachable spots or use appropriate measures magazines only, NOT internal magazines1.1 
with the equivalent degree of permanence, depending on type of arm and material to prevent removing the magazine.6.16 Magazines: If the magazine is
such as those fitted to K98, etc…It is acceptable to modify a magazine well
missing, place spots of weld or use by welding a substantial pin that would
appropriate measures in the magazine location or fix a lock to
prevent the insertion of an unmodified magazine yet would allow an empty,
permanently prevent the insertion slotted magazine to be fitted. of a magazine.6.17 Magazines: For tube magazines, drive one or several hardened steel pin(s) through magazine, chamber and frame connecting them permanently to each other. Secure by welding.6.18 Silencer/Suppressor: Permanently prevent removal of the silencer/suppressor from the barrel by use of hardened steel pin or by welding, bonding or by using appropriate measures with the equivalent degree of permanence, if the silencer/suppressor is part of the weapon.6.19 Silencer/Suppressor: Remove all  Removal of the ‘inner parts’ would notthe inner parts where possible and apply to moderators where ba?es are
their attachment points of the moderator so that only a tube remains. Drill holes that are of a diameter larger than the calibre of the firearm and at a longitudinal interval of 3 cm (short firearms) or 5 cm (long firearms) through the casing and penetrating the expansion chamber. Or else cut a longitudinal slot of minimum 6 mm from rear end to front end through the casing and penetrating the expansion chamber.
welded in place at manufacture.
Automatic firearms
7 Automatic firearms: e.g. assault rifles, (sub)machine guns, automatic pistolsPrevent the disassembly of the firearms essential components by welding, bonding or by using appropriate measures with the equivalent degree of permanence.7.1 Barrel: Cut a longitudinal slot through the barrel including the chamber where present (width: > ? calibre; length: for rifled barrels three times the length of chamber and for smoothbore barrels twice the length of the chamber).7.2 Barrel: A hole must be drilled across the chamber through both walls and through which a hardened steel pin must be inserted and securely welded (diameter > 50 % chamber, min 4,5 mm). The same pin can be used to secure the barrel to the action. Alternatively, a plug of the size of the cartridge case must be inserted into the chamber and securely welded.7.3 Barrel: Remove the feed ramp where present.7.4 Barrel: The barrel must be
Guidance NotesIn automatic pistols where removal of the barrel
permanently secured to the requires the removal of the slide, this process firearm by welding, bonding or may be achieved by the general provision of
by using appropriate measures with the equivalent degree of permanence. The pin used in operation 7.2 can be used for this purpose.
slide captivation.
7.5 Barrel: For exchange barrels  Exchange barrels for automatic pistols may only1.1 
not a?xed to the firearm, apply operations 7.1-7.3 as applicable. In addition, the
be submitted as part of a factory set and not as individual barrels; they should be serial numbered accordingly. Details of the barrels
barrels must be permanently submitted will be recorded on the deactivation prevented from being a?xed certificate of the firearm they are submitted
to a firearm by cutting, welding, bonding or using appropriate measures with the equivalent degree of permanence.7.6 Breech block/bolt head: Remove or shorten firing pin.7.7 Breech block/bolt head: Machine or remove the breech face at an angle of between 45 and 75 degrees as measured from the angle of the original face. Material must be removed across the entire breech face. All locking lugs must be removed or substantially weakened.7.8 Breech block/bolt head: Weld the firing pin hole.7.9 Slide (for automatic pistols): Machine or remove the breech face at an angle of between 45 and 75 degrees as measured from the angle of the original face. Material must be removed across the entire surface.7.10 Slide (for automatic pistols): Remove the firing pin.7.11 Slide (for automatic pistols): Remove locking lugs in slide.
with. With the exception of barrels for crew- served firearms, barrels for other automatic firearms may not be submitted. Crew-served firearm barrels may be submitted as part of a set (as discussed above) or as separate/individual barrels. Where submitted separately, such individual barrels will be issued with their own deactivation certificate. All barrels submitted as exchange barrels must have a clear and permanent serial number.
7.12 Slide (for automatic pistols): This applies to pistols such as Glock 18 where Where applicable, machine the barrel locks into ejection port as opposed to the inside of the locking edge lugs within the slideof the ejection port in the slide to an angle at a range of 45 to 75 degrees.7.13 Slide (for automatic pistols):  This applies to pistols such as Glock, SIG andIf the breech block can be H&K USP where the barrel locks into ejectiontaken o? the slide body, the port as opposed to lugs within the slide. deactivated breech block hasto be permanently fixed to the slide body.7.14 Frame/Receiver (for automatic pistols): Remove feed ramp where present.7.15 Frame/Receiver (for automatic pistols): Machine away at least 2/3 of the slide rails on both sides of the frame.1.1 
7.16 Trigger mechanism: Ensure destruction of the physical operating link between the
As long as the physical link to the firing mechanism is destroyed, it is acceptable for the trigger blade and any external hammer be left
trigger blade and the hammer, free to move. However, they must bestriker or sear. Fuse the  independent of each other and not linked in anytrigger mechanism together way. with weld withinreceiver/frame, where applicable. If such fusion of the trigger mechanism is not possible, remove the trigger mechanism and fill the area with weld or epoxy resin.7.17 Trigger mechanism: The trigger mechanism and/or housing has to be welded to the receiver/frame (in case of steel frame) or glued to the receiver/frame with high temperature resistant glue (in case of light metal or polymer frame).7.18 Automatic system: Destroy the gas piston, gas pipe and gas port by cutting or welding.7.19 Automatic system: If there is no gas piston, remove gas pipe. If the barrel is used as a gas piston, weld the deactivated barrel to the housing. In all cases where present, close the barrel’s gas vent by welding.7.20 Automatic system: Machine Remove all support on the breech face for the or remove the breech face at cartridge head. As long as the breech face is an angle of between 45 and removed, the breech block mass is reduced by 75 degrees as measured from the required percentage and is permanently the angle of the original face. fixed in place, and the firing pin is removed orMaterial must be removed  shortened, it is permissable for the cockingacross the entire surface of  handle to have independent movement. A de-the breech face and	natured, scrap fragment of the breech blockelsewhere so that bolt/breech separated from the bolt head and attached to block is reduced by minimum the cocking handle may be left free to move
50 % of original mass. Permanently fix the breech block to the firearm by welding; bonding or by using appropriate measures with the equivalent degree of permanence.
back and forth behind the main deactivated and fixed breech block/bolt mass.
7.21 Automatic system: In cases  Remove all support on the breech face for the1.1 
where bolt heads are incorporated into a bolt carrier, the carrier must be
cartridge head. As long as the breech face is removed, the breech block mass is reduced by the required percentage and is permanently
reduced by a minimum of 50 fixed in place, and the firing pin is removed or
%. The bolt head must be permanently fixed to the
shortened, it is permissable for the cocking handle to have independent movement. A de-
carrier and the carrier must be natured, scrap fragment of the breech blockpermanently fixed to the  separated from the bolt head and attached tofirearm by welding, bonding or the cocking handle may be left free to moveby using appropriate	back and forth behind the main deactivated andmeasures with the equivalent fixed breech block/bolt mass. degree of permanence.
7.22 Magazines: Weld the magazine with spots or use appropriate measures with the equivalent degree of permanence, depending on type of arm and material to prevent removing the magazine.
The term magazine refers to detachable magazines only, NOT internal magazines such as those fitted to K98, etc…
7.23 Magazines: If the magazine is It is acceptable to modify a magazine well by missing, place spots of weld welding a substantial pin that would prevent or use appropriate measures  the insertion of an unmodified magazine yet in the magazine location or fix would allow an empty, slotted magazine to be a lock to permanently prevent fitted.the insertion of a magazine.7.24 Magazines: For tube magazines, drive one or several hardened steel pin(s) through magazine, chamber and frame connecting them permanently to each other. Secure by welding.7.25 Silencer/Suppressor: Permanently prevent removal of the silencer/suppressor from the barrel by use of hardened steel pin or by welding, bonding or by using appropriate measures with the equivalent degree of permanence, if the silencer/suppressor is part of the weapon.7.26 Silencer/Suppressor: Remove Removal of the ‘inner parts’ would not apply toall the inner parts where  moderators where ba?es are welded in placepossible and their attachment at manufacture. points of the moderator sothat only a tube remains. Drill holes that are of a diameter larger than the calibre of the firearm and at a longitudinal interval of 3 cm (short firearms) or 5 cm (long firearms) through the casing and penetrating the expansion chamber. Or else cut a longitudinal slot of minimum 6 mm from rear end to front end through the casing and penetrating the expansion chamber.Muzzle loading firearms
8 muzzle loading firearms including break action (except cylinder loading revolvers)
Guidance Notes
		 Births, death, marriages and careEmploying peopleNewsBusiness and self-employedEnvironment and countrysideGuidance and regulationChildcare and parentingHousing and local servicesResearch and statisticsCitizenship and living in the UKMoney and taxPolicy papers and consultationsCrime, justice and the lawPassports, travel and living abroadTransparencyDisabled peopleVisas and immigrationHow government worksDriving and transportWorking, jobs and pensionsGet involvedHelp	Privacy	Cookies	Accessibility statement	Contact	Terms and conditions Rhestr o Wasanaethau Cymraeg	Government Digital ServiceAll content is available under the Open GovernmentLicence v3.0, except where otherwise stated	© Crown copyright
24/03/2025 Terrorism Act 2000 (TACT) and National Security Act 2023 https://www.college.police.uk/app/detention-and-custody/terrorism-act-2000-tact PageTerrorism Act 2000 (TACT) and National Security Act 2023This page is from APP, the official source of professional practice for policing. First published20 December 2021 Updated8 August 2024Written by College of Policing Detention and custody6 mins readThis section provides the main considerations for custody officers and staff dealing with Terrorism Act 2000 (TACT) and National Security Act 2023 (NSA) detainees. Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 (PACE)Code H and Schedule 8 of TACT set out the expectations and powers placed on the police in connection with the detention, treatment and questioning by police officers of persons in police detention under TACT. Code I sets out the expectations and powers placed on the police in connection with the detention, treatment and questioning by police of persons in detention under Section 27 and Schedule 6 of the National Security Act 2023.Counter terrorism (CT) policing has developed TACT and NSA form templates, which are accessible for authorised users from College Learn (login required).Designation of a police stationIn comparison to PACE custody facilities, where it is the responsibility of the chief officer to designate police stations, the Secretary of State designates places at which a person may be detained under Section 41 and Schedule 8 of TACT. Code H applies and section 27 and Schedule 6 of the National Security Act 2023 and Section 27 and Schedule 6 of the National Security Act 2023 and Code I apply (Schedule 6, paragraph 1(1) of the National Security Act 2023).Read more about the designation of a police station.Lawful arrest
Section 41 of TACT provides that a constable may arrest without a warrant a person whom he reasonably suspects to be a terrorist. Section 40 of TACT provides that a "terrorist" means a person who:(a) has committed an offence under any of sections 11, 12, 15 to 18, 54 and 56 to 63 of TACT, or(b) is or has been concerned in the commission, preparation or instigation of acts of terrorism.Section 27 of the National Security Act provides that a constable may arrest without a warrant anyone who the constable reasonably suspects is, or has been, involved in foreign power threat activity.Sections 31-33 of the National Security Act define the foreign power condition and foreign power threat activity.Read more about lawful arrest.Arrival at stationThe detainee may be booked in by the custody officer in a cell or booking-in area depending on the design of the suite. A forensic cell pod should be used if the detainee needs to be forensically searched and examined.Read more about arrival at the station.Necessity to detainDuring the booking-in process, the custody officer does not have to consider the following as it is the responsibility of the inspector who conducts the first review: the grounds for detention  whether to grant bail whether to authorise or refuse detentionThe inspector is required to review the necessity to detain as soon as practicable (see TACT Schedule 8, paragraphs 21 to 28). The same review requirement applies to Section 27 National Security Act detainees (see National Security Act 2003, Schedule 6, paragraphs 29 to 36).Note: the ‘detention not authorised’ paragraph also does not apply to a TACT/ section 27 National Security Act detainee during the booking-in process.Read more about necessity to detain.Medical attentionA TACT or section 27 National Security Act 2023 detainee will be subject to medical examination as soon as practicable after arrival. They will also be offered a medical examination on release. Code H, paragraph 9.1 of PACE states that a TACT detainee who has been held for more than 96 hours must be visited by an appropriate healthcare professional (HCP) at least once every 24 hours.Code I, paragraph 9, sets out the same requirement for section 27 National Security Act detainees. Counter Terrorism Policing Headquarters (CTPHQ) and wider CT policing, however, routinely go beyond this minimum
requirement and offer an examination on a daily basis after arrival. Read more about medical attention.Considerations for decision making (urgent interviews)In a TACT context, see paragraph 11.11 and paragraph 6.7(b)(i) of PACE Code H.In a National Security Context, see paragraph 11.12 and paragraph 6.6(a) and (b) of PACE Code I. Read more about considerations for decision making.Independent custody visitsLocal arrangements should be in place to notify the independent custody visit scheme that a TACT/section 27 National Security Act 2003 detainee is in police custody.Read more about independent custody visits.Visitor searchesAs a condition of entry, CTPHQ and wider CT policing may require that non-police officers/police staff/contract detention staff are searched on arrival at the secure suite and on any subsequent visits to that area. The extent of the search will depend on the security level at the time and will be determined by the duty inspector in conjunction with the CT senior investigating officer (SIO). It is important to note that any search must be consensual. If someone refuses, arrangements will need to be put in place to find an alternative person. Any impact on the rights of the detainee caused by a delay in these circumstances will need to be managed by the duty inspector and CT SIO. Where relevant (see section 10 of PACE), searches will be subject to legal privilege. A notice detailing the reason and extent of the search will be provided to all visitors prior to being searched.The police will provide secure facilities to ensure the safety of items that visitors are not allowed to take into custody areas (for example mobile phones, laptops, keys).Transfer of detentionTransporting the detainee (for example, initial hearing at Westminster Magistrates' Court or transfer to prison) will depend on categorisation and may be the responsibility of the police.The Prisoner Escorting and Custody Services (PECS) contractor can transfer detainee(s) but will not do so if they are categorised as CAT A detainee(s). TACT/ section 27 National Security Act 2023 detainees are given CAT status prior to leaving the custody suite as opposed to normal custody, hence why the decision will lie with police (this will be determined and communicated by regional CT policing units). PECs will only transport CAT B detainees.Read more about transfer of detention.Supervision by an inspector
For TACT detainees, see sections 21 to 28 of Schedule 8 of TACT 2000 and section 14 of PACE Code H for equivalent guidance.For section 27 National Security Act detainees, see National Security Act 2023, and Schedule 6, paragraphs 29 to 36 and section 13 of PACE Code I.Following an issue of a warrant for further detention, the duty inspector should conduct a daily welfare check for each detainee at least once in every 24-hour period. This check should consider: as far as is reasonable and appropriate, are welfare requirements being met (note: consider detainee care and any equality and individual needs) ? has the detainee seen the HCP that day? any current physical or mental health issues any medication requirements and, if so, have they been provided? whether three meals a day of good standard and variety have been provided and that reasonable requests for drinks have been met whether daily exercise for up to an hour duration has been offered and whether this has been accepted (and, if not, the reason for it) confirmation of the opportunity to shower daily  the provision of suitable reading material that any religious requirements have been met allowed visit from, or telephone call to, family member or friend  provision of clean clothes and bedding on a regular basis    that the cell is clean, well lit, ventilated and at a comfortable temperature Read more about supervision by an inspector.ExercisePACE Code H, paragraph 8.7 and PACE Code I, paragraph 8.6 state that, as a minimum requirement, brief outdoor exercise shall be offered if practicable. Where facilities exist, indoor exercise should be offered as an alternative if outside conditions are such that a detainee cannot be reasonably expected to take outdoor exercise or if requested by the detainee for reasons of security. CTPHQ and wider CT policing routinely make provision for one hour of exercise a day. In addition to being offered opportunities for this daily exercise, TACT/section 27 National Security Act 2023 detainees should also be offered access to natural light.Read more about exercise.Visits to detaineesAs TACT/section 27 National Security Act 2023 detainees are potentially subject to longer periods of detention, visits from friends or family amount to an important welfare consideration (see section 5.4 of Code H and section 5.3 of Code I). Custody officers should liaise with the CT SIO to discuss visitor-related aspects of detainee welfare.Buildings and facilities
TACT and National Security Act 2023 custody suites are designed in line with specific Ministry of Justice guidance. They differ in their specification from standard or volume custody suites.Read more about building and facilities. Back to Detention and custody overviewTagsDetention and custody
The Charter for Social Housing  Residents Social Housing White Paper  
CreditsPage 9 - Marlake Cresent,Bell Phillips, photo credit Kilian O’SullivanPage 45 - Darbishire Place,Níall McLaughlin Architects photo credit Nick CanePage 52 - Kings Crescent Estate Hackney Council, Karakusevic Carson Architects, photo credit Mark Hadden2 The Charter for Social Housing Residents – Social Housing White Paper
ContentsForeword from the Prime Minister	4Foreword from the Secretary of State	6Executive Summary	8Chapter 1:  To be safe in your home	14Chapter 2:  To know how your landlord is performing	20Chapter 3: To have your complaints dealt with promptlyand fairly	26Chapter 4: To be treated with respect, backed by a strongconsumer regulator for tenants	34Chapter 5:  To have your voice heard by your landlord	46Chapter 6: To have a good quality home andneighbourhood to live in	52Chapter 7: To be supported to take your first step toownership	64Glossary	72Annex A:	Key measures for changing the regulatoryregime for social housing	74The Charter for Social Housing Residents – Social Housing White Paper 3
Foreword from the Prime Minister
As a cub reporter in the 1980s, I was once despatched to a Wolverhampton council estate to call on a young family who had written in about the damp in their flat.And what struck me most when I arrived wasn’t the condensation streaming down the windows like a waterfall or the black spores of mould metastasising across the walls or even the rasping cough of the small baby, which seemed to get worse even in the short time I was there.It was the miserable despair of the father, a man utterly bereft of hope at the problem ever being sorted out. He’d complained to the housing office, he’d complained to his local councillor, he’d complained to anyone who would listen and many who wouldn’t, but nobody seemed to care, nobody seemed willing or able to do anything about it.
And while that scene unfolded more than 30 years ago, the culture and attitude that allowed it to happen – the idea that social tenants are less worthy of respect or can be ignored when their views are inconvenient – remains all too prevalent today.Although the exhaustive independent inquiry into the causes of the Grenfell tragedy will not report its final findings for some time yet, it is already clear that the people who called Grenfell Tower home were, like that Wolverhampton father, no strangers to their voices going unheard.If there were only a handful of social tenants in this country it would be a matter of grave concern.
4 The Charter for Social Housing Residents – Social Housing White Paper
In a nation where many millions rely on their local council or a housing association to help keep a roof over their head – and in the UK the social rented sector makes up a greater share of housing stock than in most other major economies – it is nothing shortof a scandal. And it’s one this government is going to deal with.The proposals in this White Paper will make clear the standards that every social tenant in England is entitled to expect from their landlords.They will ensure that people feel safe and secure in their homes, can get problems fixed before theyspiral out of control, and see exactly how good their landlord is at dealing with complaints.
Above all, it will give social housing tenants a voice, and ensure that it is listened to.We’re levelling up this country, making it fairer for everyone – and that includes making sure social housing tenants are treated with the respect they deserve, so that nobody should ever again feel as hopeless as the man I met all those years ago.The Rt. Hon. Boris Johnson MP Prime Minister
“We’re levelling up this country, making it fairer for everyone – and that includes making sure social housing tenants are treated with the respect they deserve.”The Charter for Social Housing Residents – Social Housing White Paper 5
Foreword from the Secretary of State
One of the privileges of my time as Secretary of State has been meeting with the bereaved and survivors of the Grenfell Tower tragedy. Their courage and grace shone through on each encounter, however harrowing and heart breaking the stories they told.Time and again, former residents would return to two themes: firstly, that they didn’t feel listened to when they raised concerns and complaints and could only wonder what might have been avoided if their voices had been heard. And secondly, a broader sense that they had not been treated with the dignity and respect they deserved. Indeed, the same dignity and respect they themselves have exhibited, in unimaginable grief and distress since the night of 14 June 2017.
These conversations with me and my predecessors were the genesis of this White Paper. Thosemost affected by the events at Grenfell Tower understandably seek answers and justice and that is what an independent public inquiry aims to provide. But, it is clear to me they also seek positive action and change for the benefit of others. I do not presume to assert that this White Paper alone answers that desire, but it is in that spirit that we publish it and will ensure its aims and ambitions are realised.
6 The Charter for Social Housing Residents – Social Housing White Paper
This Charter for Social Housing Residents sets out to raise the standard of social housing and meet theaspirations of residents throughout the country, today and in the future. It speaks to safety, to quality, to family, to life free from the blight of crime and anti- social behaviour, to the opportunity to move from rent to ownership, where this is possible.I want housing associations and local councils to ensure that those who live in social housing are treated with dignity and respect. The interests and perspective of residents must be given greater prominence in service delivery. And when things go wrong, as they inevitably sometimes do, tenants should be able to seek redress and know that they will be heard. No one should accept poor service, nor show deference to those that provide it. Landlords should welcome the views of their tenants as a route to better management.
I want tenants to feel protected and empowered by a regulatory regime and a culture of transparency, accountability, decency and service befitting of the best intentions and traditions of social housing in this country.I hope the ideas and regulatory changes we set out in this White Paper will make a measurable difference to the experiences of those living in England’s four million social homes in the years ahead.The Rt. Hon. Robert JenrickSecretary of State for Ministry of Housing, Communities and Local Government
“This Charter for Social Housing Residents sets out to raise the standard of social housing and meet the aspirations of residents throughout the country, today and in the future.”The Charter for Social Housing Residents – Social Housing White Paper 7
Executive SummaryA home should always be more than just four walls and a roof.A home should provide safety, security and dignity. An opportunity to put down roots and contribute to our community so we can enjoy social and civiclives. Regardless of who you rent from, your landlord should treat you fairly and with respect. And if things go wrong there should be a swift and effective means of redress.We all have these expectations, but for some social housing residents they have not always been met. This White Paper seeks to change that, establishing a new Charter for social housing residents.This country has a long tradition of providing homes for those most in need, going back many centuries. The first recorded almshouse was founded in York by King Athelstan. The oldest still in existence isthe Hospital of St Cross in Winchester, dating to about 1132. During the nineteenth century and early twentieth century, great philanthropists and social reformers changed the face of housing. They recognised that good quality homes with open space and amenities were essential to overcoming the chronic public health challenges of the time.Model villages such as George Cadbury’s Bournville in Birmingham, Joseph Rowntree’s New Earswick in York, and George Peabody’s and Octavia Hill’s developments in inner city London were born. Octavia Hill said her aim was to ‘make lives noble, homes happy and family life good’.From the 1890s, some local councils started to build social housing. This was given a huge boost by the Addison Act of 1919, which provided central government funding to local authorities to build “homes fit for heroes” as troops returned fromWorld War 1. Ever since, local councils have played a significant role in providing good homes to working people and creating strong communities, particularly rebuilding the country after the devastation of World War 2 when the country lost over a million homes and 4 million more were damaged.
As of 2018, local councils provided homes to over1.6 million households1. This Government has been clear that we want to see councils build morehomes and has made this possible through removing restrictions on their borrowing so they can invest.Since the 1970s we have also seen the tremendous growth of housing associations, which has transformed how social housing is delivered now. Many housing associations began in that decade from community roots, often from local churches or communities coming together in response to homelessness. Several of those small charities have become the large housing associations we knowtoday. Housing associations own approximately 60% of our social housing. The 1974 Housing Act enabled the charitable housing association sector to access funding to build new homes. In the 1980s, housing associations were given freedom to access private borrowing, seeking to blend charitable aims with commercial acumen to build more homes and take on homes from local authorities. We want housing associations to build yet more homes and to deliver their mission of charitable purpose combined with the best customer service of the private sector.From the 1980s, social housing became not only a crucial safety net for those in need, but also, for many, a vital step on the ladder towards home ownership.The introduction of the Right to Buy and shared ownership enabled millions of social tenants to buy a home of their own. We want to support even more social housing residents to own a home. This is why we are introducing a simpler and fairer shared ownership offer, allowing people to get on the firstrung by buying only 10% of their home – and why we have introduced the Right to Shared Ownership, which will enable people living in rental homes built under the new Affordable Homes Programme to purchase their own home through shared ownership.Today, the sector provides homes to 4 million households. Many landlords provide a good service to their residents. They provide a decent and safe home. They support thriving neighbourhoods andcommunities. They are open with their residents, listen to them and treat them with respect.
1 ‘Live Table 104’ https://www.gov.uk/government/statistical-data-sets/live-tables-on-dwelling-stock-including-vacants8 The Charter for Social Housing Residents – Social Housing White Paper
But this is not true of all landlords.The tragedy at Grenfell Tower in June 2017 raised critical questions for everyone involved in social housing, including residents, landlords, developers, and local and national government. We are committed to learning the lessons of the Grenfell tragedy and have already taken significant action. We have supported the bereaved and survivors, established an independent public inquiry and started implementing the recommendations of its Phase 1 findings. And through the Building Safety Bill we are undertaking the biggest change in building safety for a generation.We have also been listening intensely to social housing residents across the country about the change that they want to see. The social housing Green Paperin 2018 sought views on a wide range of potential changes, and alongside it we launched a Call for Evidence about how social housing is regulated. We received over 1,000 responses to the social housing Green Paper and over 100 to the Call for Evidence. Many residents reported positive experiences, but others did not. We heard concerns about safety and quality; of complaints being handled slowly or poorly; and about residents feeling they were not listened to, or not treated with respect.The COVID-19 pandemic has reinforced the importance of people’s homes, communities and neighbourhoods – including access to green spaces. Good landlords have ensured that their vulnerable residents have not been left alone, and have gone the extra mile to support them. It remains important for people to have access to open green spacesand playgrounds to promote exercise and mental wellbeing. And it is critical that those in social housing, as elsewhere, can live free from the blight of crime, drugs and anti-social behaviour, in developments well designed to protect them and with law enforcement there to take decisive action where necessary.Alongside the challenges posed by COVID-19, social landlords are seeking to increase energy efficiency, and are working to improve the safety of their buildings.We recognise that these pose very significant challenges and are assisting through targeted grants and support.
Many landlords have made positive changes since the publication of the social housing Green Paper. And there have been welcome initiatives to support sector- wide culture change, such as the National Housing Federation’s Together with Tenants2 programmeand the resident-led guide on how to engage with residents by See the Person and the Chartered Institute of Housing.3But there is more to do to ensure that all social housing residents have the experience we expect for them. This White Paper sets out how we will achieve this, through our new Charter for social housing residents.Building on the commitments we have already made on building safety, to the highest single funding commitment to affordable housing in a decade, and to establishing more routes for tenants to own their own home, this White Paper will deliver transformational change for social housing residents.
2  https://www.housing.org.uk/our-work/together-with-tenants/3 It’s Not Okay: a guide to tackling stigma in social housing https://www.cih.org/publications/its-not-okay-a-guide-to-tackling-stigma-in-social-housingThe Charter for Social Housing Residents – Social Housing White Paper 9
“A home should provide safety, security and dignity. An opportunity to put down roots and contribute to our community so we can enjoy social and civic lives. Regardless of who you rent from, your landlord should treat you fairly and with respect. And if things go wrongthere should be a swift and effective means of redress.”10 The Charter for Social Housing Residents – Social Housing White Paper
A new Charter for social housing residentsOur new Charter sets out what every social housing resident should be able to expect:How we will ensure this Charter is metThis White Paper sets out what we will do to ensure landlords live up to this new Charter. Our package of measures is summarised below. The most important step we will take is to work with the Regulator of Social Housing (“the regulator”) to create a strong, proactive consumer regulatory regime, strengthening the formal standards against which landlords are regulated and requiring them to:ï be transparent about their performance and decision-making – so that tenants and the regulator can hold them to account;ï put things right when they go wrong; andï listen to tenants through effective engagement.
Summary of the policy measures in this White PaperTo be safe in your homeBuilding and fire safety is a paramount concern for residents. We are committed to ensuring that all homes are safe to live in, and have identified ways both to raise safety standards and to helpresidents feel safer in their homes. Chapter 1 sets out that we will:ï Legislate to strengthen the Regulator of Social Housing’s consumer regulation objectives to explicitly include safety.ï Legislate to require social landlords to identify a nominated person responsible for complying with their health and safety requirements.ï Expect the Regulator of Social Housing to prepare a Memorandum of Understanding with the Health and Safety Executive to ensure effective sharing of information with the Building Safety Regulator.ï Launch a consultation on requiring smoke alarms in social housing and introducing new expectations for carbon monoxide alarms.ï Consult on measures to ensure that social housing residents are protected from harm caused by poor electrical safety.ï Continue to work with the Social Sector (Building Safety) Engagement Best Practice Group andthe Building Safety Regulator to ensure resident voices are heard.To know how your landlord is performingIf tenants are to be able to hold their landlord to account, they need to know how it is performing and what decisions it is making. This will allow them to challenge their landlord when things are not working as they should, and to compare its performance with that of other social landlords. Chapter 2 sets out how we will:ï Create a set of tenant satisfaction measures for landlords on things that matter to tenants.ï Introduce a new access to information scheme for social housing tenants of housing associations and other private registered providers of social housing, so that information relating to landlords is easily available.ï Ensure landlords provide a clear breakdown of how their income is being spent.ï Require landlords to identify a senior person in their organisation who is responsible for ensuring they comply with the consumer standards set by the Regulator of Social Housing.The Charter for Social Housing Residents – Social Housing White Paper 11
To have your complaints dealt with promptly and fairlyResidents should get swift and effective resolution of complaints. But we heard from some residents that making a complaint can be difficult and take too long – and that it can sometimes take months for thecomplaint to be resolved, or for the resident to be able to access the Housing Ombudsman. Chapter 3 sets out how we have recently:ï Acted to speed up access to the Housing Ombudsman by removing (through the Building Safety Bill) the need for residents to either go to a ‘designated person’ or wait eight weeks before approaching the Ombudsman directly.ï Expanded the Housing Ombudsman service, and increased its powers, so it will make decisions more quickly and can take stronger action against landlords where needed.Chapter 3 also sets out how we will do more to:ï Provide residents with consistency across landlord complaint handling by ensuring landlords self- assess against the Housing Ombudsman’s Complaint Handling Code by 31 December 2020.ï Ensure tenants know how to raise complaints and have confidence in the system by launching a communications campaign. We will expect landlords, the Housing Ombudsman and the Building Safety Regulator to ensure residents have clear and up to date information on how to complain.ï Legislate to ensure clear co-operation between the Housing Ombudsman and the Regulator of Social Housing to hold landlords to account more effectively when things go wrong.ï Make landlords more accountable for their actions by publicising the details of cases determined and published by the Housing Ombudsman.To be treated fairly and with respect, backed by a strong consumer regulator for tenantsTransformation of consumer regulation is needed to further drive the right behaviours and hold landlords to account when they fail. This will complement the robust economic regulation already in place, which will be maintained. Chapter 4 sets out our commitment to:ï Transform the consumer regulation role of the Regulator of Social Housing (“the regulator”) so it proactively monitors anddrives landlords’ compliance with improved consumer standards.ï 
Remove the ‘serious detriment test’and introduce routine inspections for the largest landlords (those with over 1,000 homes) every four years.ï Change the regulator’s objectives to explicitly cover safety and transparency, and work with it to review its consumer standards to ensure they are up to date and deliver its revised objectives.ï Give the regulator the power to publish a Code of Practice on the consumer standards to be clear what landlords are required to deliver.ï Strengthen the regulator’s enforcement powers to tackle failing landlords and to respond to new challenges facing the sector.ï Hold local authorities to account as landlords, including how they manage ArmsLength Management Organisations and Tenant Management Organisations, to make sure they deliver a good service to tenants.ï Require the regulator to set up an Advisory Committee to provide independent and unbiased advice on discharging its functions.To have your voice heard by your landlordStronger resident engagement by landlords will give residents a clearer voice so that they can hold landlords to account. In Chapter 5 we set out how we will:ï Expect the regulator to require landlords to seek out best practice and consider how they can continually improve the way they engage with social housing tenants.ï Deliver a new opportunities and empowerment programme for social housing residents, to support more effectiveengagement between landlords and residents, and to give residents tools to influence their landlords and hold them to account.ï Review professional training and development to ensure residents receive a high standard of customer service.To have a good quality home and neighbourhood to live inWe heard that tenants are proud of their communities and want greater investment in them. We wantto ensure social tenants have good quality, decent homes and neighbourhoods, including access to green space and support for wellbeing. Chapter 6 sets out that we will:ï Review the Decent Homes Standard, including access to and the quality of green spaces.ï 
12 The Charter for Social Housing Residents – Social Housing White Paper
ï Tackle anti-social behaviour by enabling tenants to know who is responsible for action and who can support and assist them if they are faced with anti- social behaviour.ï Consider the results of the allocations evidence collection exercise findings to ensure that housing is allocated in the fairest way possible and achieves the best outcomes for local places and communities.To be supported to take your first step to ownershipWe are continuing to increase the supply of good quality social homes, and working to give as many residents as possible the right to purchase their own home. Chapter 7 explains how we are:ï Investing £11.5 billion to build up to 180,000 affordable homes – the highest single funding commitment to affordable housing in a decade. Around half of these new homes will be for affordable home ownership.ï Implementing a new, fairer and more accessible model for Shared Ownership.ï Implementing a new Right to Shared Ownership for tenants of housing associations and other private registered providers who live in new grant funded homes for rent.ï Emphasising through our new National Design Guide the importance of building beautiful and well-designed social homes.ï 
Introducing a new Affordable Homes Guarantee Scheme.ï Encouraging local authorities to take advantage of our removal of the borrowing cap to build more council homes.The measures in this White Paper apply to social housing landlords and residents in England. Separate arrangements apply in the devolved administrations of Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland.
4 Some of the regulator’s Standards do not apply to shared owners as set out at: https://www.gov.uk/guidance/regulatory-standardsThe Charter for Social Housing Residents – Social Housing White Paper 13
  Chapter 1:  To be safe in your home14 The Charter for Social Housing Residents – Social Housing White Paper
Ensuring good health through good quality, safe and decent homeshas been at the cornerstone of developing social housing over the past century, led by the vision shown by the pioneering work of Octavia Hill, George Peabody and others.The tragedy at Grenfell Tower shook public trust in building safety and revealed significant failings. Our renewed drive in this White Paper puts residents back at the heart of building safety and goes further in delivering changes to ensure that every social housing resident is safe in their home.We have already:ï Made up to £400 million available to social sector landlords to fund the removal and replacement of unsafe cladding of aluminium composite materials on residential social housing buildings over18 metres, and announced a further £1 billion of grant funding to cover the costs of remediating unsafe non-aluminium composite materials on residential buildings over 18 metres.ï Published a Building Safety Bill, which sets out an enhanced regulatory regime for all buildings, including a more stringent fire and structural safety regime for higher-risk buildings, with residents having a strong voice in the system.ï Published a Fire Safety Consultation on Government proposals to implement the recommendations in the Grenfell Tower Inquiry’s Phase 1 report that require changes to the law.ï 
Supported a Social Sector (Building Safety) Engagement Best Practice Group, bringing together social landlords and residents from across the country to test approaches to engagement on building safety.ï Published a Fire Safety Bill which will clarify the scope of the Fire Safety Order in its application to the structure, external walls and flat entrance doors in multi-occupied residential buildings.We will:ï Legislate to strengthen the Regulator of Social Housing’s consumer regulation objectives to explicitly include safety.ï Legislate to require social landlords to identify a nominated person responsible for complying with their health and safety requirements.ï Expect the Regulator of Social Housing to prepare a Memorandum of Understanding with the Health and Safety Executive to ensure effective sharing of information with the Building Safety Regulator.ï Launch a consultation on mandating smoke and carbon monoxide alarms in social housing.ï Consult on measures to ensure that social housing residents are protected from harm caused by poor electrical safety.ï Build on the work of the Social Sector (Building Safety) Engagement Best Practice Group, supporting the development of statutory and good practice guidance on engaging residents in all tenures on safety issues.ï 
The Charter for Social Housing Residents – Social Housing White Paper 15
Ensuring buildings are safe1. Building safety is a top priority for the Government. We have already made up to£400 million available to social sector landlords to fund the removal and replacement of unsafe cladding of aluminium composite materials (ACM) on residential social housing buildingsover 18 metres. At Budget 2020 we went further, announcing an additional £1 billion to accelerate the remediation of unsafe non-ACM on residential buildings over 18 metres. At the end of October 2020, 151 (97%) of the 155 social sector buildings identified with ACM cladding systems unlikely to meet Building Regulations had either completed or started remediation, with 90 (58%) having now completed remediation and 74% in total having de-risked the building by removing the ACM cladding. Plans are in place to remediate the remaining four buildings.52. In July 2020, we published our Building Safety Bill, which brings forward measures to put in place an enhanced regulatory regime for all buildings, including a more stringent regime for the design, construction, day-to-day management and maintenance of higher-risk buildings, with residents having a strong voice in the system. The new regimes will deliver stronger enforcement and sanctions to ensure homes are safe. These will ensure the right people are held to account and will drive a culture change to put safetyfirst. Local enforcement agencies and national regulators, including a new Building Safety Regulator, will work together to ensure that the safety of buildings across all tenures is improved. The Building Safety Regulator will be responsible for all regulatory decisions under the new regime during the design, construction, occupation and refurbishment of higher-risk buildings.3. The proposals in the Building Safety Bill aim to bring about a culture change so thatorganisations who manage buildings across all tenures, including higher-risk buildings, prioritise residents and their safety. It is important that the social housing regime supports fire safety, and that the building safety and social housing regimes work effectively together. To dothis we will:ï Legislate to strengthen the Regulator of Social Housing’s consumer regulation objective so that it explicitly includes safety (paragraph 59).ï 
Legislate to require social landlords to identify a nominated person responsible for complying with their health and safety requirements (paragraph 61).ï Expect the Regulator of Social Housing to prepare a Memorandum of Understanding with the Health and Safety Executive, once the national Building Safety Regulatoris created, to ensure effective sharing of information (paragraph 62).4. Alongside the Building Safety Bill, we published the Fire Safety Consultation as part of government’s package of reform to improve building and fire safety in all regulated premises where people live, stay or work. The Fire Safety Consultation seeks views and asks questions on our proposals to implement the recommendations in the Grenfell Tower Inquiry’s Phase 1 report that require changes to the law. These proposals seek to provide residents with greater assurance and fire safety improvements in their buildings. We are seeking to implement the recommendations in the most practical, proportionate and effective manner. In many cases, our proposals go beyond the Grenfell Tower Inquiry’s recommendations, whilst in others we have proposed an approach which prioritises residents’ safety in a way thatis proportionate to the risks the Grenfell Tower Inquiry identified.5. We published a Fire Safety Bill which clarifies that under the Fire Safety Order 2005 a responsible person or duty-holder for multi-occupied residential buildings must assess the fire safety risks for the structure, external walls and flat entrance doors as part of the fire risk assessment process. Where appropriate, the responsible person or duty-holder must put in place general fire precautions to mitigate any risks in relation to these parts of the building.1. 
5 https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/934661/Building_Safety_Data_Release_ October_2020.pdf16 The Charter for Social Housing Residents – Social Housing White Paper
Engagement on safety6. Putting residents at the heart of building safety continues to be a core priority for us. The Independent Review of Building Regulations and Fire Safety, commissioned following the Grenfell tragedy, called for government action to develop a national culture of engagement on fire and structural safety for residents of all tenures. We also heard in response to the Building a Safer Future consultation that residents want more effective, tailored, regular communication around fire and structural safety issues, and a range of ways to engage. Residents told us that more effective engagement with landlords would help to support them to feel safer in their homes.7. Social landlords have a key role to play in supporting their residents to feel safe in their homes. For residents, knowing you live in a safe, secure building is of paramount importance, for your physical safety and for your mental health. Trust in your landlord is crucial to this, and ensuring there is two-way engagement on how safety is managed is a central part of gaining that trust. To support this change in culture, we want to make sure that residents know howto communicate with their landlord or building manager on fire and structural safety issues, and that they feel confident their voices are heard.We also want to create a culture where landlords and building safety managers communicate effectively with their residents on safety issues.8. To deliver this, through the Building Safety Bill we are introducing a requirement for the ‘Accountable Person’ for each higher- risk building to produce and implement aresident engagement strategy to promote the participation of tenants and leaseholders in decisions that are made about building safety risks in their building. This will ensure that:ï residents automatically receive information about the fire and structural protections in place to manage risks within their building, and are able to access the building Safety Case Report (a report that the Accountable Person will have to write in which they make an explicit claim that they are managing major accident risks within the building and evidence exactly how they are going about it) and more detailed safety information about the building where appropriate, if they wish to do so;ï 
residents have access to a quick and effective route to raise complaints about fire and structural safety; and thatï residents have information to enable them to understand and fulfil their safety responsibilities.9. We have learned a great deal from listening to residents and understanding what changesthey want to see. We consulted a mixed-tenure Residents Reference Panel, whose members helped us to ensure that our reforms are informed by the experience of people living in higher-risk buildings.10. Since March 2019 we have also been running a Social Sector (Building Safety) Engagement Best Practice Group6 bringing together social landlords and residents from across the country to test approaches to engagement on buildingsafety and foster stronger partnerships between residents and landlords. This has taken forward work in three areas:ï information and understanding;ï landlord and resident responsibilities; andï action to take in the event of a fire.11. The pilots run by the group have explored ways to support residents and landlords to communicate effectively on fire safety issues.This work has helped inform our approach to the provision of resident information and the setting of responsibilities in the Building Safety Bill published in July 2020 for pre-legislative scrutiny. We have really valued the voluntary effort that residents have made in this group to identifying practical ways to improve communication on building safety, and for the support and time that landlords have contributed to takingthis forward. The group’s final report and recommendations will be published shortly.12. We are working with the shadow Building Safety Regulator (based in the Health and SafetyExecutive) to ensure that resident voice continues to shape the new regulatory regime as it evolves, building on the propositions in our Building Safety Bill that the regulator will establish a resident panel to assist it in determining its priorities and in informing any guidance that it publishes on resident engagement.
6  https://www.gov.uk/government/groups/social-sector-building-safety-engagement-best-practice-groupThe Charter for Social Housing Residents – Social Housing White Paper 17
“Social landlords have a key role to play in supporting their residents to feel safe in their homes. For residents, knowing you live in a safe, secure building is of paramount importance, for your physical safety and for your mental health.”18 The Charter for Social Housing Residents – Social Housing White Paper
Setting standards on smoke and carbon monoxide alarms and electrical safety13. Safety measures in the social sector should be in line with the legal protections afforded to private sector tenants. Responses to the social housing Green Paper showed overwhelmingsupport for consistency in safety measures across social and private rented housing. Although many social landlords have already taken steps to keep tenants safe, it is unacceptable that around 200,000 social households are withouta working smoke alarm and over 2.3 million are without a working carbon monoxide alarm.714. 
We want to bring safety requirements for smoke alarms and carbon monoxide alarms in line with private rented sector requirements. That is why, alongside this White Paper, we have launched a consultation on extending requirements for smoke and carbon monoxide alarms, including introducingnew requirements in social housing. We will also consult separately on ways to ensure that social housing tenants are protected from harm caused by poor electrical safety.
7 ‘English Housing Survey, Headline Report 2018-19’https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/860076/2018-19_EHS_Headline_Report.pdfThe Charter for Social Housing Residents – Social Housing White Paper 19
  Chapter 2: To know how your landlord is performingIf tenants are to be able to hold their landlords to account, they need information on how their landlord isperforming, what decisions it is making and who is responsible.20 The Charter for Social Housing Residents – Social Housing White Paper
As housing associations began to expand from the mid-1970s, they were generally closely connected to the communities they were building homes for, but this has become strained with the more substantial growth in the scale of their operations from themid-2000’s. Some housing associations have been criticised for excessive administration costs and executive pay, with reported average Chief Executive pay of £181,000 in 2019/20 – more than the Prime Minister – and some, in excess of £400,000 per year8. This White Paper seeks to redress that balance and recreate strong connections between landlords and tenants to ensure transparency and accountability and ensure all landlords consider their purpose and their tenants, at all times. We have heard clearly from tenants how important this is to them.We will:ï Expect the Regulator of Social Housing to bring in a set of tenant satisfaction measures for all landlords on things that matter to tenants.ï Introduce a new access to information scheme for social housing tenants of housing associations and other private registered providers of social housing, so that information relating to landlords is easily accessible by tenants.ï Ensure landlords provide a clear breakdown of how their income is being spent, including levels of executive remuneration, to be published alongside their tenant satisfaction measures.ï Require landlords to identify a senior person in their organisation who is responsible for ensuring they comply with the consumer standards set by the Regulator of Social Housing.ï Expect landlords to report to every tenant on such matters at least once a year, if not continuously, using technology.Tenant Satisfaction Measures15. Although landlords are already required to give tenants timely and relevant performance information, including the publication of an annual report, the format and content of this information can vary significantly. Privateregistered providers and local authority landlords should be giving tenants access to a set of clear, comparable tenant satisfaction measures onthe things they care about to ensure they can understand their landlord‘s performance. This information is also important in informing the
Regulator of Social Housing’s (“the regulator’s”) approach to regulating landlords.16. The Regulator of Social Housing will develop a process for collecting and publishing a core set of tenant satisfaction measures for all social landlords. These should follow the themes set out in the social housing Green Paper, widely supported by tenants, around properties being in good repair, building safety, engagement and neighbourhood management, including measures on anti-social behaviour. They should include both objective quantitative measures and tenant perception measures.17. These measures will provide tenants with greater transparency about their landlord’s performance. They will also inform the regulator about how the landlord is complying with the consumer standards under a proactive consumer regulation regime. The regulator should consider the best way of publishing measures so that they are clear and accessible for all tenants, and how to ensure landlords publicise them, but we would expect an annual statement to be provided to every tenant as a minimum and, unless thereare special reasons, for technology to be used (such as an app) to provide this more directly and accessibly.18. We have worked with groups across the sector including tenant representatives, landlords, trade bodies and the regulator to develop the draftset of tenant satisfaction measures set out in Box A. We expect the regulator to do further work, engaging with tenants and landlords, to finalise these and embed them within the regulatory system. The importance of carefuldesign of the tenant satisfaction measures was highlighted in responses to the Call for Evidence about the regulatory regime for social housing.Many respondents expressed concern about the comparability of different landlords and the regulator will need to consider this. Theregulator will also work with the Building Safety Regulator as it develops performance standards and reporting requirements as part of the new building safety regime for higher-risk buildings.
8 Inside Housing Chief Executive Staff Survey 2020 (23 October 2020)https://www.insidehousing.co.uk/insight/insight/inside-housing-chief-executive-salary-survey-2020-68245The Charter for Social Housing Residents – Social Housing White Paper 21
“We want to ensure a culture change whereby landlords are more open with residents, beyond the information providedthrough tenant satisfaction measures.”22 The Charter for Social Housing Residents – Social Housing White Paper
19. In addition, we will expect landlords to publish three financial measures alongside these tenant satisfaction measures, providing clear and accessible information on how much landlords are spendingon administrative costs and executive remuneration (see Box B). These will not inform the regulator’s consumer regulation activity but will be made available for tenants’ information. The regulator separately considers the effectiveness and efficiency of private registered providers through its Value for Money standard, as part of its economic regulation regime.Box B: Draft Financial MeasuresThemeDraft financial measuresExecutive remunerationChief Executive or equivalent salary, relative to the size of the landlordExecutive remuneration, relative to the size of the landlordEfficiency and effectivenessManagement costs, relative to the size of the landlordNew access to information scheme20. We want to ensure a culture change whereby landlords are more open with tenants, beyond the information provided through tenant satisfaction measures. Local authority tenants can already access information from their landlord through a request made under the Freedom of Information Act 2000, but this is not available to tenants of housing associations and other private registered providers. Good landlords would want to share the information with tenants when asked, but there is a risk that others might choose to withhold information that they should share. To address this, wewill introduce a new access to information scheme for social housing tenants of housing associations and other private registered providers through the social housing regulatory regime. This will ensure that all social housing tenants can access information from their landlord or be supported by others to do so such as councillors, MPs, solicitors, advocates or local journalists to support them in holding landlords to account.The Charter for Social Housing Residents – Social Housing White Paper 23
21. This new access to information scheme will allow tenants or their representatives to access information related to the management of social housing held by their landlord, and also relevantinformation that may be held by sub-contractors. The scheme will include time limits for providing the information. It will also set out the circumstances in which a landlord may refuse to disclose information. This will be broadly aligned with the exemptions from disclosure under the Freedom of Information Act 2000.22. It is important that if a tenant feels their landlord has unreasonably withheld information then they can challenge that decision. The first stage of this should be an internal review carried out by the landlord. We propose that the Housing Ombudsman will be engaged to decide on cases that have not been resolved at this first internal review stage. The Housing Ombudsman would also be able to refer suspected systemic breaches of the scheme to the regulator as it does on other matters. We will work with the Housing Ombudsman to develop this new role and agree its responsibilities.
More information on use of funds23. To ensure openness and transparency we also want social landlords to provide clearinformation to show how they are making the best use of their resources. Housing associations and other private registered providers of social housing have a total annual turnover of more than £20 billion, so it is important that tenants know how this income is being used and that they are able to see whether they are getting value for money. Social landlords should welcome scrutiny of whether they are using resources in the most efficient and effective way, including in their approach to executive remuneration and employment costs.24. We will work with the Regulator of Social Housing to ensure all social landlords provide a clear breakdown of howtheir income is being spent. This needs to be in an accessible format so tenants can see how funds are being spent and can challengewhether money is being spent on the things that matter to them. We will work with the sector to explore best practice on the use of apps to make this information more accessible to tenants.
24 The Charter for Social Housing Residents – Social Housing White Paper
Clear leadership in landlords to deliver a quality service25. We want it to be clear to tenants who, in the leadership of their landlord, is responsible for ensuring good quality customer service. We therefore expect the Regulator of Social Housing to require that all landlords identify a ‘responsible person’ who will ensurethat the organisation is complying with consumer standards (see paragraph 65). This person will be key to ensuring landlords deliver good quality customer service and drive culture change where it is needed. The regulator will introduce this measure as part of a broader requirement for landlords to provide greater clarity on the roles and responsibilities of senior level staff. We will expect the regulator to implement these requirements through changes to its consumer standards.26. There should be such a ‘responsible person’ identified in every landlord, regardless of size or type. Given the diverse nature of the sector, it should be for landlords to decide who is best placed to fulfil this function. What is essential is that responsibility must rest with an individual person at a suitably senior level within the landlord’s organisation to drive change and unite the organisation behind delivering good customer service; and that this person mustbe clearly identified to tenants, the regulator and the Housing Ombudsman. For example, this might be a senior executive within a local authority or large housing association, or the Chief Executive of a small housing association.The Charter for Social Housing Residents – Social Housing White Paper 25
  Chapter 3: To have your complaints dealt with promptly and fairly
Since it was created in 1996, the Housing Ombudsman has been delivering a vital service to ensure disputes are resolved and residents receive redress where appropriate. We are clear that residents should be able to raise concerns without fear and get swift and effective resolution when they do. We heard from some residents that making a complaint can be difficult and take too long – and that it can sometimes take months for the complaint tobe resolved, or for the residentto be able to access the Housing Ombudsman. This chapter sets out how we will fix that.We have already:ï Set out in the Building Safety Bill how we will speed up access to the Housing Ombudsman by removing the need for residents to go to a designated person or wait eight weeks before approaching them – removing the ‘democratic filter’.ï Expanded the Housing Ombudsman service which is aiming to halve its decision times by March 2022.ï Increased the Housing Ombudsman’s powers to take action against landlords where needed. The Housing Ombudsman has published a new Complaint Handling Code and guidance on new orders that will be implemented from 1 January 2021.
We will:ï Support improved complaint handling by landlords and hold them to account through stronger action by the Housing Ombudsman.ï Keep the Housing Ombudsman’s powers, and compliance with them, under review and consider ways to strengthen them, including the option of legislation to put the Complaint Handling Code on a statutory footing.ï Run an awareness campaign so social housing residents know their rights, are confident in navigating their routes to complain, and are aware of how to escalate to get redress where needed.ï Ensure lessons are learned and maintain residents’ confidence in the Housing Ombudsman Service through the appointment by the Ombudsmanof an independent reviewer by March 2021 to examine any complaints made about the service that the Housing Ombudsman provides.ï Formalise and strengthen the relationship between the Regulator of Social Housing and the Housing Ombudsman by introducing a statutory requirement for both bodies to co-operate with each other in undertaking their responsibilities in holding landlords to account.ï Make the Housing Ombudsman a statutory consultee for any proposal concerning changes to the Regulator of Social Housing’s economic and consumer standards.ï Make the Regulator of Social Housing a statutory consultee for any changes to the Housing Ombudsman Scheme.ï 
26 The Charter for Social Housing Residents – Social Housing White Paper
ï From March 2021, publish on the Housing Ombudsman’s website, reports on the complaints the Housing Ombudsman has handled for individual landlords, as well as the determinations on individual cases.Standards that ensure residents get effective resolution and redress27. Landlords have a key role to play in ensuring their residents know how to make complaints and can do so confidently. They must do this as one of the conditions of membership of theHousing Ombudsman Scheme. The Scheme sets out how residents’ complaints about landlords are investigated by the Housing Ombudsman.28. To ensure that complaints handling is taken as seriously as it should be, the Housing Ombudsman has published a new ComplaintHandling Code. This promotes consistency across landlords’ complaints procedures and learning from complaints to drive service improvements. The new Code sets out what residents can expect from their landlord when they complain, how to make a complaint and how to progressit through the landlord’s complaints procedure. The Code emphasises the importance of resident involvement in complaint handling through the formation of resident panels. Landlords have been asked to self-assess against the Code by 31 December 2020 and publish the results. Non- compliance with the Code could result in theHousing Ombudsman issuing complaint handling failure orders which will outline the details of any failure, be notified to the landlord’s governance body, the responsible person or the Regulatorof Social Housing (“the regulator”) and be published on the Ombudsman’s website. The Housing Ombudsman has published guidance9 on these new orders that will be implemented from 1 January 2021.29. To support this change, we have approved new powers for the Housing Ombudsman to identify best practice, outlined in the new Code, with which landlords will be expected to comply(see Box C: The Housing Ombudsman). In addition, the strengthened Housing Ombudsman Scheme includes new requirements on landlords to publish their complaints procedures on their websites and in correspondence to residents,
and to deal with complaints in accordance with published procedures or within a reasonable timeframe.Resolving complaints more quicklyAccelerating resolution of complaints by landlords30. We want to see landlords putting things right for residents as quickly as possible before the Housing Ombudsman has to be involved. Residents told us that some complaints took weeks, and even months, for landlords to resolve. We also heard the experiences of residents who had been delayed in accessing the Housing Ombudsman Service as landlords’ complaints processes were slow and ineffective. To tackle this, landlords will be required to comply with the Housing Ombudsman’s Complaint Handling Code, ensuringthat they have good processes in place to respond swiftly and effectively to complaints.31. Resolving complaints within a landlord’s own process can provide quicker outcomes for residents than a formal investigation by the Housing Ombudsman and can improverelationships between residents and landlords. The Housing Ombudsman can help to support the resolution of disputes before they reach the formal investigation stage. In 2019/20, 80% of complaints and enquiries were closed at this early stage by the Housing Ombudsman
9  https://www.housing-ombudsman.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2020/11/Guidance-on-complaint-handling-failure-orders.pdf10 The Housing Ombudsman’s role is set out in the legislation (Housing Act 1996) and the Housing Ombudsman Scheme. As at 31 March 2020, 2,303 landlords were members of the Scheme.The Charter for Social Housing Residents – Social Housing White Paper 27
28 The Charter for Social Housing Residents – Social Housing White Paper

without needing to go onto further, formal investigation.11 We want the Housing Ombudsman to use its increased resources to support improved complaint handling by landlords and to resolve a greater proportion of formal complaints quickly using mediation. The Housing Ombudsman’s new Complaint Handling Code will help support this culture change and will set clearer expectations for landlords on their complaints handling process.32. New powers are also in place for the Housing Ombudsman to intervene when landlords are unreasonably slow in resolving complaints. Where landlords do not act, in addition to the Housing Ombudsman issuing complaint handling failure orders, the regulator will be able take firm action where necessary where there is evidence of systemic failings and abreach of the consumer standards. The Housing Ombudsman will be able to investigate potential systemic failings and refer the outcome to the landlord’s board or elected members, to the ‘responsible person’ or to the regulator. The Housing Ombudsman will also identify and recommend best practice to landlords, helping to improve services and prevent residents experiencing similar issues. We will keep the Housing Ombudsman’s powers, and compliance with them, under review and consider waysto strengthen them, including the option of legislation putting the Complaint Handling Code on a statutory footing.
Accelerating redress through the Housing Ombudsman33. We also want to see the Housing Ombudsman deciding cases more quickly to ensure residents are not waiting months for resolution. The Housing Ombudsman aims to halve the average determination time for complaints formally referred over the next two years: first to 4-5 months by March 2021, then to 3-4 months by March 2022. We have agreed increased resourcing through the 2020/21Business Plan which will result in a more efficient dispute resolution service.12 To make this work, it is critical that the Housing Ombudsman has prompt access to the evidence it needs to make fair and timely decisions. Delays in landlords providing the necessary information can slow residents’ access to redress.34. That is why we have ensured that a strengthened Housing Ombudsman Scheme and a new Code on complaint handling gives the Housing Ombudsman stronger powers to require landlords to provide the information it needs within a reasonable timeframe. This will deliver quicker decisions and reduce determination times. From 2021 the Housing Ombudsman will use new powers to issue a complaint handling failure order to take appropriate action to progress a complaint if a landlord fails to provide the information as expected.1. 
	11 See Page 7, KPI Tablehttps://www.housing-ombudsman.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2020/11/Housing-Ombudsman-Business-Plan-2019-20.pdf12 The Housing Ombudsman Business Plan 2020/21https://www.housing-ombudsman.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2020/11/Housing-Ombudsman-business-plan-2020-21.pdfThe Charter for Social Housing Residents – Social Housing White Paper 29
“We want people living in social housing to be able to access swift and effective resolution and not face unnecessary barriers.”30 The Charter for Social Housing Residents – Social Housing White Paper
35. There is high compliance with the orders made by the Housing Ombudsman, with the majority requiring landlords to comply with inside three months.13 Where there is non-compliance, the Housing Ombudsman has the power to refer this to the regulator. From 2021, the Housing Ombudsman will also be able to issue complaint handling failure orders where handling failures by landlords are identified. These will be published on a quarterly basis, highlightingthe names of the landlords and reasons for the orders. This information will also be shared with the regulator, will form part of the Housing Ombudsman’s annual landlord performance reports and will be available on the Housing Ombudsman’s website.36. To ensure residents’ confidence in the Housing Ombudsman Service is maintained, the Housing Ombudsman will appoint an independent reviewer by March 2021, to examine a sample of complaints made about the service the Housing Ombudsman provides. The Housing Ombudsman Service will publish the independent reviewer’s findings, including where the Housing Ombudsman needs to improve performance and learn from outcomes.Awareness campaign37. These changes will speed up complaints handling for residents and ensure action when needed. But in too many cases we have heard that landlords’ complaints processes are complexand that it is not always clear how to make a complaint. Many residents do not know how to approach the Housing Ombudsman Service and are unfamiliar with the role played bythe regulator.38. We want to make sure residents are aware of all routes open to them to raise concerns and feel confident using them. We will runan awareness campaign so social housing residents know their rights, are confident in navigating their routes to complain, and are aware of how to escalate to get redress where needed. We will work with residents,landlords, the Housing Ombudsman Service, and other organisations to ensure that the campaign is as far reaching as possible. We also expect the Housing Ombudsman Service and the regulator
to do more to ensure people living in social housing know about the services they provide.39. The Housing Ombudsman’s new Complaint Handling Code states that landlord’s complaints policy should be widely publicised through as many routes as possible - for example through social media channels, in leaflets, newsletters, online and as part of regular correspondence with residents. This will be extended in future updates of the Code to require social landlords to prominently display other information including posters, for residents in their offices or shared residential areas.Removing barriers to accessing redress for social housing40. Currently, social housing residents who want to formally escalate unresolved complaints to the Housing Ombudsman face additional hurdles compared to consumers accessing other redress schemes. Residents have to raise their issue with a Member of Parliament, a local councillor or a designated tenant panel who will, ifappropriate, refer it to the Housing Ombudsman (a step known as the ‘democratic filter’), orwait eight weeks from the landlord’s complaint process ending.41. It is clear that the ‘democratic filter’ delays formal resolution of complaints and may put people off seeking redress altogether – particularly those who are vulnerable or feel less confident in navigating the process. We heard about the problems this creates forpeople living in social housing. During 2019/20, only 6.9% of the cases entering the Housing Ombudsman’s formal remit were referred to them by a designated person.14 We want people living in social housing to be able to accessswift and effective resolution and not face unnecessary barriers. We have set out in the Building Safety Bill our proposal to remove the requirement for complaints to pass through the ‘democratic filter’.
13 See Page 7, KPI Tablehttps://www.housing-ombudsman.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2019/07/Housing-Ombudsman-ARA-2018-19-Web-Accessible.pdf14 See page 30 https://www.housing-ombudsman.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2020/09/CCS207_CCS0320285036-001_The-Housing-Ombudsman- ARA-2019-20_Accessible.pdfThe Charter for Social Housing Residents – Social Housing White Paper 31
The previous social housing complaints processThe new social housing complaints processCo-operation and transparency will ensure landlords are accountable for their performance on resolving complaints
42. The Housing Ombudsman has set higher standards for landlord effectiveness and speed to improve complaints handling for residents by raising the conditions of membership of its scheme. All social landlords must by law be a member of the Housing Ombudsman Scheme. The Scheme sets the standards that landlords must meet in terms of publishing complaintsprocedures, managing complaints in accordance with procedure or within a reasonable timescale, and providing copies of any information requested by the Housing Ombudsman which it believes is relevant to the complaint.43. From March 2021 the Housing Ombudsman will publish the details of cases it has determined on its website, and data on individual landlords’ complaint volumes, categories and outcomes. This will support the
new tenant satisfaction measures the regulator is developing on complaints handling. It will ensure social housing residents can better hold their landlords to account on the way they handle complaints. This information will be used, alongside other data provided by the Housing Ombudsman, to help inform the regulator’s assurance of landlords’ compliance with its consumer standards, and any actions that may result from a failure to meet these.44. Effective co-operation and joint working between the Housing Ombudsman and the regulator is vital to hold landlords to account for their performance on resolving complaints. In September 2020 the Memorandum of Understanding15 between the two organisations was broadened, setting out how thisco-operation and joint working takes place.
15  https://www.housing-ombudsman.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2020/09/MOU-Ombudsman-and-Regulator-20200901.pdf32 The Charter for Social Housing Residents – Social Housing White Paper
45. We will formalise and further strengthen the relationship between the Regulator of Social Housing and the Housing Ombudsman by introducing a statutoryrequirement for both bodies to co-operate with each other in undertaking their responsibilities. This will complement proposals
to ensure effective co-operation between the regulator and the Building Safety Regulator on matters of building safety. We will also bring forward legislation to require the Regulator of Social Housing and Housing Ombudsman to prepare and regularly review their Memorandum of Understanding.
Stronger co-operation between the regulator and Housing Ombudsman.
46. To make best use of the experience and expertise of the Housing Ombudsman and the regulator we will make the Housing Ombudsmana statutory consultee for any proposal concerning changes to the Regulator of Social Housing’s economic and consumer standards. This will ensure the Housing Ombudsman has the opportunity to understand and shape future regulatory changes to support joint working. Likewise, we will make the Regulator of Social Housing a statutory consultee for any changes to the Housing Ombudsman Scheme.47. The Building Safety Bill sets out that both the regulator and the Housing Ombudsman will have a power for reciprocal information sharing and a reciprocal duty of cooperation with the Building Safety Regulator covering higher-risk residential buildings. This will enable both of these organisations to work together with the Building Safety Regulator on areas of common interestto support each other in the delivery of their relevant functions or in issuing joint guidance to help explain their different but linked roles and responsibilities.
The Housing Ombudsman will engage with residents directly48. It is important that residents can be confident in using the Housing Ombudsman Service when they need to, including those who might be isolated or vulnerable. We welcome the Housing Ombudsman Service’s engagement activity, which includes a feedback groupfor residents to share their experiences of the Service face to face with the HousingOmbudsman. The Housing Ombudsman Service hosted weekly webinars open to residents and landlords over the summer of 2020 on the new Housing Ombudsman Scheme and Complaint Handling Code. It will organise virtual ‘Meet the Ombudsman’ events to coincide with thepublication of quarterly insight reports, providing information on complaints data, learning points and case studies. A new Resident Panel to seek views and obtain feedback is planned from February 2021.The Charter for Social Housing Residents – Social Housing White Paper 33
  Chapter 4: To be treated with respect, backedby a strong consumer regulator for tenants34 The Charter for Social Housing Residents – Social Housing White Paper
Regulation has supported the expansion of housing associations since the 1970s, ensuring that they are financially robust. It has been key to the success story of housing associations becoming the main deliverers of new social homes, with the sector currently able to access£100 billion in private finance to support new affordable homes16. But it is clear that, unlike the successful economic regulation regime,the current regime of consumer regulation is not strong enough to ensure that social landlords (both local authorities and privateregistered providers) deliver to the expectations set out in our new Charter. This chapter sets out how we will establish a new consumer regulation function, within the Regulator of Social Housing, that is proactive and holds all landlords to account for the services they deliver. Alongside this, we will maintain the current robust approach to economic regulation that is so importantto maintaining a strong and sustainable sector.We have already:ï Created a new standalone regulator, separate from the Homes and Communities Agency (now Homes England), with its own Board and Chief Executive.Through this White Paper and working with the Regulator of Social Housing (“the regulator”), we will introduce a proactive, proportionate, outcome-focused and risk-based approach to consumer regulation.We will:ï Transform the Regulator of Social Housing so it proactively monitors and drives landlords’ compliance with its consumer standards.ï Remove the ‘serious detriment test’ and introduce routine inspections for the largest landlords (with over 1,000 homes) every four years.ï 
Change the Regulator of Social Housing’s objectives to explicitly cover safety and transparency, and work with it to review its consumer standards to ensure they are up to date and deliver its revised objectives.ï Give the Regulator of Social Housing the power to publish a Code of Practice on the consumer standards to be clearer on what landlords are required to deliver.ï Strengthen the Regulator of Social Housing’s enforcement powers to tackle failing landlords and to respond to new challenges facing the sector, by removing the cap on the level of fines it can issue, introducing Performance Improvement Plans for landlords failing to comply, reducing the notice period for surveys on the condition of properties, and introducing a new power to arrange emergency repairs if needed where a survey uncovers evidence of systemic landlord failures.ï Make it explicit that provisions in contracts between local authorities and Arms Length Management Organisations or Tenant Management Organisations would be deemed void if they hindered the Regulator of Social Housing in its exercise of its powers.ï Review the statutory Right to Manage guidance.ï Set out an expectation for all landlords to self-refer breaches with the regulatory standards.ï Strengthen the Regulator of Social Housing’s powers to provide robust economic regulation of private registered providers.ï Require the Regulator of Social Housing to set up an Advisory Committee to provide independent and unbiased advice on discharging its functions.49. These changes will ensure that the needs of tenants are embedded in the culture of all landlords. These reforms are informed by the review of social housing regulation and the Call for Evidence that we published alongside the social housing Green Paper. The findings of the review are set out in Annex A: Key findings and measures for changing the regulatory regime for social housing.50. It is vital to ensure that the new consumer regulation regime is carefully designed, to make sure that it can help deliver the culture change set out in this White Paper. Someof the measures set out in this chapter will require primary legislation before they can be implemented, and we will legislate as soon
16  https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/quarterly-survey-for-q1-april-to-june-2020-to-2021The Charter for Social Housing Residents – Social Housing White Paper 35
as parliamentary time allows. We know that delivering the scale of reform set out in this White Paper will involve extensive engagement with the sector to make sure we are getting this right, and we will expect the regulator to consult with landlords and tenants as they design the reformed consumer regime to make sure it delivers the outcomes set out in this chapter.Retaining co-regulation51. The existing regulatory regime works on the basis of co-regulation. This means that it is the responsibility of the boards of housingassociations and other private providers of social housing, or of councillors in local authority landlords, to be assured that they comply with the outcome focused standards set by the the regulator. The regulator will seek assurance that boards and councillors have sufficient oversight of compliance with those standards, and any regulatory intervention must be justified and proportionate. Economic regulation is working well, and our review has shown that landlords and investors share that view. We recommend that the Regulator of Social Housing retains the principle of co-regulation, as it ensures that the focus is on driving good outcomes for existing and future tenants and that the fundamental responsibility for effective service delivery lies with local authorities, housing associations and other private registered providers.There will be a new regime for regulating social housing52. An earlier review of regulation, in 2010, led to the adoption of a reactive approach to consumer regulation for housing associations, local authorities and other private registered providers.17 This means that currently theregulator does not proactively scrutinise landlord compliance or routinely monitor performance– it only acts when issues are bought to its attention. This risks serious systemic failures against consumer standards being uncovered at a late stage.53. At present the regulator can only use its powers to tackle a breach of a consumer standard when it has reasonable grounds to suspect that:ï the failure has resulted in a serious detriment to the landlord’s tenants (or potential tenants);ï 
there is a significant risk that, if no action is taken by the regulator, the failure will result in a serious detriment to the landlord’s tenants (or potential tenants);ï if a failure occurs, the failure will result in a serious detriment to the landlord’s tenants (or potential tenants); orï if a failure occurs, there will be a significant risk that, if no action is taken by the regulator, the failure will result in a serious detriment to the landlord’s tenants (or potential tenants).ï This is referred to as the ‘serious detriment test’.18 The regulator interprets serious detriment as being where there is a risk of, or actual, serious harm to tenants.54. In contrast, for economic regulation the regulator takes a proactive, proportionate and risk-based approach to regulating its economic standards. It actively monitors all landlords by regularly collecting financial data and it carries out periodic in-depth assessments based on the relative risk profile of landlords.55. Through consultation following the social housing Green Paper and the Call for Evidence we heard strong support for a more proactive approach to consumer regulation to achieve parity with economic regulation. We agree that the social housing sector would benefit froma more balanced approach which ensures that there is a similar level of regulatory oversight of both the consumer and economic standards.Introducing routine inspections of landlords can and will play an important role in delivering this more balanced approach. This will give tenants confidence that their landlord is being properly scrutinised, and will ensure that tenants know that protecting their interests is at the heart of the regulatory system.56. We will work with the Regulator of Social Housing to introduce a proactive, proportionate, outcome focused and risk-based approach to consumer regulation. To achieve this, we will:ï Legislate to remove the ‘serious detriment test’ as soon as parliamentary time allows, to eliminate barriers to the Regulator of Social Housing adopting a proactive approachto monitoring and oversight of landlord performance on consumer issues.
17  https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/review-of-social-housing-regulation--218 Sections 198A (2) and (5) of the Housing and Regeneration Act 2008 https://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2008/17/section/198A36 The Charter for Social Housing Residents – Social Housing White Paper
ï Work with the Regulator of Social Housing to strengthen its oversight by introducing a system of routine inspections to obtain assurance fromlandlords that they are complying with the consumer standards. This will be based on a risk profile to ensure that those landlords at greatest risk of failing, or where failure might have the greatest impact on tenants, are subject to greater oversight. As part of this we expect the Regulator of Social Housing, subject to meeting any wider priorities, to aim to inspect those landlords with over 1,000 homes every 4 years. It may carry out inspections at more frequent intervals where a routine inspectionfinds a breach or significant risk of a breach of its standards.ï Expect the Regulator of Social Housing to undertake specific, reactive investigations and/or inspections where appropriate. This could be when a serious potential compliance breach has been brought to its attention by tenants (such as systemic failure to act on fire risk assessment recommendations); by theHousing Ombudsman through its new powers to investigate potential systemic issues; orif the regulator wants to carry out bespoke inspections.ï Expect the Regulator of Social Housing to be transparent where a landlord is found non-compliant with its standards, by publishing its findings from its inspections and investigations and the details of any enforcement action it will take. We willalso expect the regulator to be clear where, following routine inspections, it is assured that a landlord is compliant with the standards.57. It is for the regulator to decide the most appropriate approach to delivering these requirements, but we will expect it to engage with tenants and landlords in designing the new approach as well as:ï Being clear on how it will determine which landlords to inspect, and how it will meet the aim to routinely inspect those with over 1,000 homes every 4 years.ï Setting out the different approaches to inspections and likely notice periods involved.
Box D: Proactive and reactive inspectionsInspections will be an important source of assurance that social landlords (local authorities and private registered providers) are complying with the consumer standards. Subject to consultation with tenants, landlords and other stakeholders, these are likely to involve three key stages:1. A desk-top review to analyse information that the regulator obtains from a number of sourcesto identify landlords that are at risk of potential systemic non-compliance with the consumer standards. The review will be carried out once a year for all registered landlords. Information may come from a number of sources, including tenant satisfaction measures (about which further detail is set out above in Chapter 2), evidence of systemic issues raised by tenants or others, and informationfrom other regulators and the Housing Ombudsman.2. A new risk-based programme of routine inspections. This will prioritise those providers that the desk top review has identified as high risk and will seek assurance about those landlords’ compliance with the consumer standards. The regulator may inspect landlords at any time and could take account of a number of factors indeciding which landlord it will investigate. This might include:ï Concerns highlighted in the desk-top study, or other information which comes to the regulator’s attention.ï Any concerns about potential non-compliance with consumer standards arising from the regulator’s economic regulation of providers.ï The size of the organisation (given the scale of impacts in the largest providers).ï Providers that house the most vulnerable tenants e.g. registered providers of specialised supported housing.We expect the regulator to aim to routinely inspect those landlords with over 1,000 homes every four years and make it clear when it is reassured of a landlord’s compliance with its standards.3. Reactive investigations and/or inspections.Such activities could take two forms:ï Where specific issues arise that need to be dealt with at a faster pace and outside the planned programme of inspections.ï Focused inspections to examine assurance of one or more landlord’s compliance in delivering a specific service to tenants.Where there is a clear case of non-compliance following a routine or reactive inspection, the regulator will publish the outcome of its inspection and take appropriate enforcement action. In the case of breaches by housing associations and other private registered providers, the regulator may go further and seek assurance about the adequacy of the governance arrangements.The Charter for Social Housing Residents – Social Housing White Paper 37
“Through consultation following the social housing Green Paper and the Call for Evidence we heard strong support for a more proactive approach to consumer regulation to achieve parity with economic regulation.”38 The Charter for Social Housing Residents – Social Housing White Paper
58. We also heard from both tenants and landlords that they would like the regulator to be clearer in its expectations of landlords. To deliver this, we will legislate to give the Regulator of Social Housing a power to publish a Code ofPractice on the consumer standards alongside its existing ability to prepare Codes of Practice for economic standards. The Regulator of Social Housing will review all its consumer standards to ensure they remain up-to-date and deliver its statutory objectives. As part of its review we will expect the Regulator of Social Housing to make it clear that landlords should have a policy setting out how they should tackle issues surrounding domestic abuse, working with other agencies as appropriate;and to require landlords to show how they have sought out and considered ways to improve tenant engagement.Putting safety at the heart of social housing regulation59. As we have made clear throughout this White Paper, the safety of tenants is paramount and should be the primary concern of all landlords. Specialist health and safety bodies, such as the Fire and Rescue Services and the Health and Safety Executive, are the main bodies indealing with any incident and enforcement of an incident caused by a breach of safety legislation. In addition, local authorities have a duty under the Housing Act 2004 to take action if they identify a serious ‘category 1’ hazard in homes owned by housing associations and other private registered providers. However, the regulator also plays a role in holding landlords to account for meeting health and safety legislation through compliance with its regulatory standards. We will reinforce this role by strengtheningthe Regulator of Social Housing’s consumer regulation objective to explicitlyinclude safety.60. Driving and embedding culture change throughout organisations is the collective responsibility of Boards and, in the case of local authorities, councillors. However, these arrangements are not always visible to tenants. It can be difficult to find out who in a large organisation tenants can hold to account for the safety of their homes. Experience in othersectors demonstrates that regulation is important in building a culture of transparency and accountability within organisations.
For example, in financial services, the introduction of a Senior Managers & Certification Regime has driven a culture change in risk management across the sector.61. We will require all landlords to have a person within the organisation responsible for compliance with their statutory health and safety responsibilities. This person should be visibleand accessible to tenants. As such, we will legislate to require landlords to identify and make public a nominated personresponsible for compliance with their health and safety requirements. The health and safety responsible person should be sufficiently senior to drive a culture of safety throughout the landlord organisation, and would have specific responsibility for issues such as:ï driving a strong culture across the organisation for prioritising and delivering health and safety requirements;ï ensuring robust health and safety systems are in place; andï providing assurance that health and safety risks are being managed effectively.62. These reforms will drive a whole culture change and system transformation, strengthening the relationship between the regulator and the Housing Ombudsman and ensuring effective working between them and the Building Safety Regulator. Through the Building Safety Bill,we are introducing a legal requirement for the regulator and Building Safety Regulator to co-operate with each other on matters of fire and building safety, to help embed a culture of working together. We will go furtherby expecting the Regulator of Social Housing to prepare a Memorandum of Understanding with the Health and Safety Executive, once the Building Safety Regulator is created, to underpin provisions in the Building Safety Bill as necessary to ensure that they can share information effectively.The Charter for Social Housing Residents – Social Housing White Paper 39
Making social landlords more transparent and accountable63. We have been clear how greater transparency is essential so that tenants are able to hold theirlandlord to account. The regulatory regime plays a key role in making this happen.64. Landlords are already required to provide their tenants with certain information. We want to see a culture change that ensures landlords are more open with their tenants. This will enable tenants to hold their landlords to account, and also to monitor and compare their landlord’s performance. The failure of some landlords to share information in a clear, consistent way not only deprives tenants of the ability to assess how their landlord is performing. It can also undermine the tenant’s trust in what their landlord is saying.65. To deliver this outcome, we will make a number of changes through the regulatory regime:ï We will legislate to add transparency to the Regulator of Social Housing’s consumer regulation objective.ï Landlords will be required to report on a number of tenant satisfaction measures on things that matter to tenants (see paragraphs 15-18 above, and Box A: Draft Tenant Satisfaction Measures). We will expect the regulator to develop a processfor collecting and publishing these tenant satisfaction measures in a consistent way that is comparable across landlords. The tenant satisfaction measures will give people living in social housing information about how their landlord is performing and supportthe regulator’s monitoring of landlords’ performance.ï We expect the Regulator of Social Housing to require all landlords to identify a ‘responsible person’ who will ensure that the organisation is complying with consumer standards so that tenants know who is responsible for ensuring compliance with the regulator’s consumer standards (see paragraphs 25).ï 
We will ensure the new access to information scheme for social housing tenants of housing associations and other private registered providers is placed on a regulatory footing (see paragraphs 20-22). This will ensure that tenants can access key information on issues that matter to them in a timely manner, unless there is good reason for this information not to be provided.Strengthening the regulator’s powers to enforce66. The regulator currently has a range of powers on enforcement and has published guidance on how it will regulate to ensure landlords comply with its regulatory standards. To date the regulator has used its formal enforcement powers infrequently for breaches of the consumer standards. Often the threat of taking action is sufficient to drive change without needing to take formal action.67. Removal of the ‘serious detriment test’, combined with a more proactive approach to consumer regulation, will remove barriers to the regulator making full use of its monitoring,investigation and enforcement powers. We will go further and also legislate to:ï Enable the Regulator of Social Housing to require a Performance ImprovementPlan for landlords who fail to comply with a consumer standard. This approach will enable tenants to be aware of what action their landlords will carry out and when, and challenge the landlord if it fails to meet these requirements.ï Reduce the notice period that the Regulator of Social Housing must give a landlord to survey the condition of properties from 28 days to 2 days. The regulator is most likely to use this power in emergency situations when investigating whether tenants are living in unacceptableor unsafe conditions. Reducing the period of notice aligns with the emphasis on protecting tenants, and will enable the regulator to assess properties more quickly and take decisive action if required.
40 The Charter for Social Housing Residents – Social Housing White Paper
ï Enable the Regulator of Social Housing, following completion of a survey, to arrange repairs of dwellings in an emergency where there is clear systemic failure by the landlord. We will also legislate so the regulator can recoup the costs fromthe landlord. This will allow swift action, where other regulatory interventions have not addressed the problem, in the unacceptable situation where tenants are forced to live with the consequences of significant and unwarranted delays to emergency repairs.ï Remove the requirement for the Regulator of Social Housing to seek approval from the Secretary of State before employing its own staff to carry out inspections for breaches of the consumer standards. This is unnecessarily bureaucratic and should be removed in light of changes to consumer regulation set out in this White Paper.ï 
Remove the cap on the level of fines the Regulator of Social Housing is able to issue. This will give greater flexibility todetermine the appropriate sanction depending on the circumstances, and bring the regulator’s power more into line with other regulatory bodies (such as those in the finance or environment sectors).19
“We want to see a transformed consumer regulatory regime which holds landlords to account in maintaining good quality homes and services, prioritising safety, treating tenants respectfully and being transparent with information.”19 For example, please see under the Regulatory and Enforcement Sanctions Act 2008, the Environment Agency and Financial Conduct Authority have powers to issue a variable penalty fine https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/environment-agency-enforcement-and-sanctions-policy/ environment-agency-enforcement-and-sanctions-policyThe Charter for Social Housing Residents – Social Housing White Paper 41
Local Authorities, Arms Length Management Organisations and Tenant Management Organisations will also be held to account68. Social tenants should receive the same level of service, regardless of who their landlord is.The regulator currently has limited interaction with local authorities as they are not subject to the governance and viability standard or the value for money standard. The changes set out to deliver proactive oversight of consumerstandards will provide the regulator with greater oversight of the performance of local authorities’ landlord function.69. Local authorities sometimes contract out the management of some or all of their homes to Arms Length Management Organisations. Council tenants can also create Tenant Management Organisations to manage the housing themselves.Local authorities remain the landlord for housing managed by such organisations and are responsible for ensuring these homes meet the regulator’s consumer standards.70. Contractual arrangements between local authority landlords and Arms Length Management Organisations should not create barriers to the regulator using its powers. Local authorities that contract out management services to Arms Length Management Organisations should ensure their agreements with arm’s length bodies do not prevent the regulator from acting in the event of non- compliance with the consumer standards.We will legislate to make it explicit that provisions in contracts between local authorities and Arms Length Management Organisations or Tenant Management Organisations would be deemed void if they hindered the Regulator of Social Housing in its exercise of its powers. Ahead of this, we will ask all local authorities that contractout social housing management services to review their contracts to ensure they do not hinder the Regulator of Social Housing in its exercise of its powers.71. Tenant Management Organisations are formed when council tenants exercise their Right to Manage. The Right to Manage Regulations set the statutory framework to establish a Tenant Management Organisation. The regulations are supported by statutory guidance including
the Modular Management Agreement which sets out the arrangements governing the relationship between local authorities and Tenant Management Organisations.72. We heard of good work that some Tenant Management Organisations do in delivering services and additional benefits to their communities. We also heard that the guidance could be clearer on the responsibilities of Tenant Management Organisations and local authorities.In order to ensure good management across the whole sector and to ensure oversight of Tenant Management Organisations is effectiveand transparent, we will review the statutory Right to Manage guidance. We will work with an expert steering group of those with knowledge of the sector to support this work.73. There is a requirement in the regulator’s governance standard for housing associations and other private providers of social housing to self-refer non-compliance with all the regulatory standards. This does not currently apply tolocal authorities as they are not subject to the regulator’s governance standard. We will work with the Regulator of Social Housing toset out an expectation for local authorities to self-refer breaches of the consumer standards to ensure that issues of concern to tenants are dealt with as quickly as possible.The regulator will have the right leadership for its new role74. We have heard that many tenants’ trust in the regulatory regime has been shaken, particularly following the tragedy at Grenfell Tower. The way the regulator was set up meant that it is currently not empowered to proactively monitor compliance with consumer standards, andtherefore it has not been easily visible to tenants.75. We want to see a transformed consumer regulatory regime which holds landlords to account in maintaining good quality homes and services, prioritising safety, treating tenants respectfully and being transparent with information. It will build the links between economic and consumer regulation – giving the regulator a full, rather than partial view of the landlord.76. We believe that creating a new consumer regulation function within the existing regulator is the best approach to deliver this change for tenants. Creating a separate regulator would1. 
42 The Charter for Social Housing Residents – Social Housing White Paper
not be as effective, preventing failures on the consumer standards feeding into wider governance standards and creating a more complex system. This complexity could mean that tenants would not know where to raiseevidence of organisational failure and breaches of the consumer standards, and would increase the risk that issues would fall through the cracks between regulators.77. In order to deliver transformative change in consumer regulation the regulator not only has to have the right powers, but also needs people with the right skills to deliver it, while retaining wider capability to deliver across all its activities. A strong team will still be needed to deliver the economic regulation regime. We will enable an entirely new function within the Regulator of Social Housing to be set up, with senior leadership and staff with the right expertise in consumer regulation, customer service and tenant engagement to effectively deliver the new proactive consumer regulation regime.78. Rebuilding trust will take time and we have already taken steps. On 1 October 2018 the Government created a new standalone regulator, separate from the Homes and Communities Agency (now Homes England) with its own Board and Chief Executive. The regulator now presents its own annual report to Parliament. The regulator’s Chief Executive, as the accounting officer, is required, when called, to give evidence before the Parliamentary Public Accounts Committee and the relevant Select Committee. As a standalone regulator it has greater transparency and clearer accountability.79. The changes being proposed will transform the way in which consumer regulation isconducted and we will expect the Regulator of Social Housing to develop a strategy for appropriate and ongoing publicity to make tenants aware of what it does and how to get in touch. We will also expect the regulator to be more transparent in how it works and to have greater engagement with tenants.80. 
It is important that the regulator has the right level of oversight to embed the enhanced consumer regulation role in its organisation. It is also important that the people providing this oversight bring a diversity of thought, background and experience, to better reflectthe diverse needs and views of social tenants. To facilitate this, we will:ï Broaden the skills mix and diversity of Board Members, ensuring that more Board Members have consumer regulation experience.ï Work with the Regulator of Social Housing to make sure it is resourced and able to recruit the right new staff with diverse backgrounds and skills, including at senior levels.ï Legislate to require the Regulator of Social Housing to set up an Advisory Committee to provide independent and unbiased advice to the regulator on discharging its functions. This committee will not be a decision-making body, but the regulator will be expected to seek its views on specific regulatory matters – such as on any changes to its consumer or economic standards or making the regulator a more transparent organisation. These changes will support the transformative change needed and build trust with tenants and social landlords across England.Robust economic regulation will be maintained81. With an increasing consumer regulatory focus, it is important that we retain the current robust focus on economic regulation. Economic regulation ensures landlords are well-run andfinancially sound, to be sure that tenants’ homes are secure for the long term and that landlords can fund repairs and deliver effective services.Robust economic regulation has also reassured investors and given them confidence to invest considerable sums to help build new homes.82. Through the Call for Evidence we heard that the economic regulatory framework is working effectively. Some respondents (particularlylandlords) expressed concern about how changes to consumer regulation could dilute the strong economic focus. They were concerned that the skills and resources of the regulator would be stretched to deliver an expanded regulatory remit, weakening the economic regime andThe Charter for Social Housing Residents – Social Housing White Paper 43
undermining the new consumer regime. By ensuring the resources the regulator needs to deliver proactive consumer regulation are additional and that the people doing it havethe appropriate skills, we will ensure that robust economic regulation is maintained.Adapting to new challenges83. The Call for Evidence specifically asked about areas of economic regulation that might not be working or may face future challenges. Most respondents did not specify areas in which regulation should change. Rather, they identified potential risks to its effectiveness. These aligned with the regulator’s own assessment of sector risk and where the greatest challenges were likely to be going forward. These are:ï Sector diversity and development risk;ï New business models (for example lease- based providers of supported housing);ï The impact of for-profit providers on the sector and tenants;ï The potential impact on economic regulation of changes to consumer regulation.84. The social housing sector has changed significantly over recent years. The regulator has adapted its approach to keep ahead of these changes. Its annual Sector Risk Profile20 which sets out the range of strategic and financial challenges facing the social housing sector is valued by providers.85. In terms of sector diversity and development risk, the regulator actively highlights areas where it believes risks are increasing. The regulatoris using its oversight and regulatory powers to assess the risks associated with lease-basedmodels. It has set out the challenges commonly associated with this business model in its addendum to its Sector Risk Profile and signalled clearly that it will continue to do all it can to protect tenants’ homes and, where possible, keep them in the social rented sector.2186. For-profit providers have existed in the social housing sector for some time, and their presence has increased significantly in the last two years. There are clearly opportunities brought by new and increased sources of investment to fund social housing. These providers can bring with them new ideas and ways of working that could present opportunities for specialisation, operating
or financial efficiencies, and improved quality for tenants. In response to the Call for Evidence we heard some concerns that profit maximisation could result in a poor service to tenants. Asthe for-profit sector continues to grow, we will continue work to ensure we understand its impact properly. However, the reforms to consumer regulation set out above will address the risk of poor service delivery for all providers, with new tenant satisfaction measures and a new inspection regime driving landlords to deliver high quality services to tenants.87. We have concluded it is not necessary to make significant changes to the economic regulation regime at this time. However, we will continue to consider whether there are any further refinements to the existing regulatory framework that are necessary to retain robust economic regulation.88. There are some changes that can be made to the legislation to improve the ability of the Regulator of Social Housing to monitor all housing associations and other private registered providers. We will:ï Tighten the definition of ‘non-profit’ in relation to the registration of private registered providers to ensure landlords are properly classified and treated – for example, toensure that the regulator properly designates providers, and that bodies really operating for profit do not attract the more favourablehousing benefit status for supported housing.ï Require landlords to notify the Regulator of Social Housing when there is a change in control of a housing association.ï Introduce a ‘look-through’ power that would enable the regulator to follow money paid to bodies outside of the regulated sector and who are therefore not directly regulated. The power would, for example, enable the regulator to investigate potential fraud by examining the financial accounts of organisations thought to be financiallybenefiting from a registered provider. We will consider further the checks and safeguards needed so that there is no misuse of the power on organisations or individuals that are not part of the regulated sector.
20  https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/sector-risk-profiles21 Lease-based providers of specialised supported housing – Addendum to the Social Risk Profile 2018, April 2019 44 The Charter for Social Housing Residents – Social Housing White Paper
The Charter for Social Housing Residents – Social Housing White Paper 45
  Chapter 5: To have your voice heard by your landlord46 The Charter for Social Housing Residents – Social Housing White Paper
The best landlords engage well with their residents and listen tothem with respect. We have recently seen many examples of effective engagement with residents on how their homes are managed and run.This includes the Right to Manage initiative and important work done by tenant led organisations such as the Tenant Participation Advisory Service and the See the Person campaign. It also includes work many landlords did during COVID-19. But performance across the sector is not consistent. We heard from residents how important it was their landlords really listened to them. And we heard examples of residents feeling patronised, ignored or treated with disrespect. We want to change this.This chapter explains how we willensure residents are heard.We will:ï Expect the Regulator of Social Housing to require landlords to seek out best practice and consider how they can continually improve the way they engage with social housing tenants.ï Deliver a new opportunities and empowerment programme for social housing residents, to support more effective engagement between landlords and residents, and to give residents tools to influence their landlords and hold them to account.ï Review professional training and development to ensure residents receive a high standard of customer service.Improving landlord engagement89. Engagement can take many forms, but the crucial factor is that it is tailored appropriately. There will be tenants who want to proactively engage with the policies of their landlord, and others who simply want to know that their landlord is thinking of them in the wayit implements change and is keeping them informed. We expect all landlords to tailor their engagement in the future.90. 
We want to see landlords inform and engage tenants in an effective way. Many landlords do this well already, but this is not the case for all landlords. Engagement opportunities can range from involvement in surveys, focus groups and local events to membership of theorganisation’s Board or scrutiny panel. Important sector-led initiatives, such as the National Housing Federation’s ‘Together with Tenants’ campaign, are also playing a key role in making organisations more transparent and accessible. We want to build on this and embed a culture of continuous improvement in landlords’ approach to tenant engagement. We want to ensure that they do more to draw on and learn from best practice on engagement, including from other sectors. We will expect the Regulator of Social Housing to require landlords to show how they have sought out and considered ways to improve tenant engagement.Resident Empowerment91. The conversations we have had with residents in creating this White Paper have been fundamental to our understanding of what is important to people living in social housing. We will commit to ongoing ministerial engagement to continue to listen to residents and enable them to have theirvoices heard. This will ensure residents are kept at the heart of future policymaking and can continue to shape social housing.92. To support residents to engage effectively, we will deliver a new opportunities and empowerment programme open to all social housing residents, to support their effective engagement with landlords. The programme will deliver a range of learning and support activities, as well as providing information for residents on ways to get involved, including their opportunities and rights to do this. Throughthis work, residents will be given the tools to better influence and hold landlords to account and drive delivery of higher quality services that are focused on their needs. We will work with tenant led national bodies to set out a plan for how best we can support residents to take part in scrutiny activities which are so important in holding their landlord to account.The Charter for Social Housing Residents – Social Housing White Paper 47
48 The Charter for Social Housing Residents – Social Housing White Paper
Tackling Loneliness93. Engagement is more than just resident involvement with landlords. It is also about engaging with your neighbours and community. Tackling loneliness and supporting people to have meaningful social relationships is crucialto people’s physical and mental health. Social housing residents have a similar age profile to all households but are more likely to be living alone, or to be lone parents, than those in other tenures. They may face more challenges in combating loneliness.2294. In response to COVID-19, the Government launched a major effort to ensure that no one feels lonely. This included the latest#LetsTalkLoneliness public campaign, including new public guidance offering useful tips and advice, and a £5 million fund for national loneliness organisations. A ‘Tackling Loneliness Network’ of over 65 high-profile private, public and voluntary sector organisations wasformed to bring together expertise and develop innovative actions.95. Many landlords also responded quickly to COVID-19 by setting up teams focused on communicating with and supporting their most vulnerable residents. Although the impact of COVID-19 has paused some services as landlords have focused on the immediate challenges of the pandemic, many landlords have found waysto continue engagement through a mix of virtual meetings and telephone calls. Residents too have played an important role by being open to new ways of communication to enable them to engage with their landlord and other residents. We have seen resident led initiatives spring up, offering support to other residents and helpingto tackle the loneliness that some were feeling as a result of COVID-19.
Strengthening professional development96. Alongside giving residents the right tools and opportunities, landlords themselves willneed to have the right skills and approach for engagement to really work. For most people living in social housing, their experience of dealing with landlords is with frontline staff – whether through a phone call to a customer service centre, visiting their local housing office, or engaging with contractors making repairs.When residents interact with landlords they should expect and receive a professional service from competent and empathetic staff.97. We have heard positive experiences of landlord staff who treated residents with care and respect. But we also heard that this is not always the case, and there were incidences where people felt talked down to or ignored by staff and contractors. We want all landlord staff to act professionally, listen to their residents and, at all times, treat them with courtesy and respect.98. To support this, we will establish a review of professional training and development to consider the appropriate qualifications and standards for social housing staffin different roles, including senior staff. Senior leaders must be able to manage their organisations effectively and drive forward cultural changes to ensure that all residents are treated with courtesy and respect. The review will be informed by a Working Group made up of residents, landlords, professional bodies and academics, which will explore the relevance and value of professional qualifications. As well as assessing professional requirements more broadly, including any specific customer service focused requirements, the review will consider best practice for delivering support on mental health23 to ensure staff maintain their skills andknowledge and, if required, set out proposals for new qualifications.
22 English Housing Survey, social rented sector 2017-18https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/english-housing-survey-2017-to-2018-social-rented-sector23 See CIPD website for more information https://www.cipd.co.uk/learn/cpd/aboutThe Charter for Social Housing Residents – Social Housing White Paper 49
“The conversations we have had with residents in creating this White Paper have been fundamental toour understanding of what isimportant to people living in social housing.”
· .i.i;..._.,IJ i:= .	:r:-	--	- :::;;i,f=t::	 ,.:·J
  Chapter 6: To have a good quality home and neighbourhood to live in
Creating well designed, decent homes and good neighbourhoods has been at the heart of developing social housing from the outset.Early local authority home building prioritised space and facilities, and today landlords are expected to provide decent, well-maintained homes and do their bit in keeping neighbourhoods safe and clean.We heard from our discussions with residents and the responses to the social housing Green Paper how important it was that the areas where they lived were decent and well maintained. People talked to us of their pride in their community, but how sometimes this was let down by poor neighbourhood management, upkeep of buildings and the quality of shared spaces.Some of these issues have beenmagnified by COVID-19; some residents have struggled to find green spaces to exercise and others have experienced isolation, loneliness and the challenge of dealing with anti-social behaviour. We want to change this and ensure that allsocial housing residents can enjoy good neighbourhoods and access to green space. This chapter sets out how we will ensure good quality, decent homes and neighbourhoods, including access to green space and support for wellbeing.We have already:ï Announced the Green Homes Grant for 2020/21, which social landlords are eligible to bid for, which will fund up to two thirds of the costof hiring tradespeople to upgrade the energy performance of homes.ï Announced a £50 million demonstrator project to support the decarbonisation of social housing over 2020/21.ï 
Published our 25 Year Environment Plan committing to connect people with the environment to improve health and wellbeing.ï Encouraged developments that promote health and wellbeing through the National Planning Policy Framework and National Design Guide.ï Announced a consultation through the Planning for the Future White Paper on proposals to enable more and better green space in development.ï Committed to expanding access to mental health services through the NHS Long Term Plan. Our investment of a further £2.3 billion a year by 2023/24 will ensure that the NHS provides high quality, evidence-based mental health services to an additional 2 million people.ï Acted to tackle segregation and stigmatisation through the planning system.We will:ï Review the Decent Homes Standard to consider if it should be updated, including how it can better support the decarbonisation and energy efficiency of social homes, and improve communal and green spaces.ï Continue to engage with the latest evidence on the impact of housing conditions on health, including COVID-19 transmission, and actively consider options to mitigate these impacts.ï Review professionalisation to consider how well housing staff are equipped to work with people with mental health needs and encourage best practice for landlords working with those with mental health needs.ï Clarify the roles of agencies involved in tackling anti-social behaviour and signpost tenants to those agencies who can give them the most appropriate support and assistance when faced with anti- social behaviour.ï Consider the results of the allocations evidence collection exercise findings to ensure that housing is allocated in the fairest way possible and achieves the best outcomes for local places and communities.The Charter for Social Housing Residents – Social Housing White Paper 53
The Decent Homes Standard99. Since 2001 the Decent Homes Standard24 has played a key role in setting the minimum quality that social homes should be. The Decent Homes Standard sets out four criteria for evaluating decency – it requires that homes are free of serious hazards, are in a reasonable state of repair, have reasonably modern facilities and services such as kitchens and bathrooms, and have efficient heating and effective insulation.100. In line with those areas directed by Government, the Regulator of Social Housing (“the regulator”) requires that social rented homes are maintained by landlords to at least the quality set out by the Government’s Decent Homes Standard. Good progress has been made on ensuring homes meet the Standard. The number of social homes classified as non-decent reduced from 20% in 2010 to 12% in 2018.25 The social sector hasa lower proportion of homes that do not meet the Standard than the private rented and owner- occupied sectors.101. During our consultation events, we heard that the Decent Homes Standard is no longerfully effective and does not reflect present day concerns, including on energy efficiency or safety. Some respondents told us they would like to see more investment in the locality and green spaces surrounding their home, including measures to combat crime and anti-social behaviour. The design of buildings and their surroundings can help provide safe places to live and work. We are mindful that the design of a neighbourhood or estate, and the homes within them, can also be a factor in local levels of crime and anti-social behaviour.102. Landlords are expected to keep homes secure and protected from entry by intruders. But we recognise that we can go further. Physicalmeasures such as CCTV, alley-gating and good quality lighting can all be effective in keeping neighbourhoods safe and secure. We want to explore how we can go further in using the Decent Homes Standard to keep residents secure and help tackle anti-social behaviour.103. 
We will review the Decent Homes Standard and consider whether it needs to be updated to ensure it is delivering whatis needed for safety and decency now. As a first step the review will consider the case for change. We aim to complete this part of the Review by Autumn 2021. If theevidence demonstrates that we need to revise the Standard, we will consider the strategic, economic and management case for new criteria as a second stage of the review. It is important that any changes to the Standard are affordable and deliverable. We will convene a sounding board of residents, experts, landlords and sector representatives that will review the evidence and support this work.Energy efficiency104. We are committed to decarbonising our homes. Climate change is a critical global issue, and homes contribute 14% of all UK greenhouse emissions26. Working to address the impactof social homes will contribute to the United Kingdom’s commitment to net-zero carbon emissions by 2050 and help to reduce residents’ energy bills. It will also contribute to our legally binding fuel poverty target and the Energy Performance Certificate Band C aspiration set out in the Clean Growth Strategy.
24 https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/7812/138355.pdf25 English Housing Survey Headline Report 2018-19, Table 2.2 https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/ attachment_data/file/860076/2018-19_EHS_Headline_Report.pdf26  https://www.theccc.org.uk/2019/02/21/uk-homes-unfit-for-the-challenges-of-climate-change-ccc-says/54 The Charter for Social Housing Residents – Social Housing White Paper
105. We will ensure that the Decent Homes review considers how it can work to support better energy efficiency and the decarbonisationof social homes. We recently announced the Green Homes Grant for 2020/2127 which social landlords are eligible to bid for, which will fund up to two thirds of the cost of hiring tradespeople to upgrade the energy performance of homes – up to a maximum contribution of £5,000. At the Chancellor’s summer economic update, the Government announced a £50m demonstrator project28 to start the decarbonisation of social housing over 2020/21. This will encourage innovationand help inform the design of the future Social Housing Decarbonisation Fund.Provision of green spaces106. In addition to the responses to the social housing Green Paper’s question on decent homes,COVID-19 is also showing the importance of access to safe, open and green spaces for people’s wellbeing. The importance of access to green spaces for exercise and mental wellbeing is especially important for those without private gardens. In our manifesto, we set an ambition for all new streets to be lined with trees. Street trees can bring a wide range of benefits that can lead to long-term improvements in people’s health, including environmental improvements relatedto biodiversity and climate change, and social benefits, such as encouraging increased levels of walking, improved mental health and decreased incidences of crime.107. The Government’s 25 Year Environment Plan, published in January 2018, makes commitments to connect people with the environment to improve health and wellbeing. It includes a commitment to develop a National Framework of Green Infrastructure Standards, recognising the vital role that good green infrastructure can play in health and wellbeing, as well as wider benefits such as helping in nature’s recovery, supporting local economies and adapting to climate change. We are bringing forward a new Framework of Green Infrastructure Standardsto show what good green infrastructure looks like and to help local authorities, developers and communities to improve green infrastructure, including greenspace provision in their area.
This includes providing adequate access to high quality green space for their local communities.108. The 25 Year Environment Plan also sets out that spending time in the natural environment can improve our mental health and feelings of wellbeing. It can reduce stress, fatigue, anxietyand depression. In support of these commitments, we will begin a project to explore how to scaleup green social prescribing services in England in order to improve mental health outcomes, reduce health inequalities and reduce demand on the health and social care system.109. We will invest over £4 million29 to bring together multiple partners to co-design and co-deliver this work, including the Department of Health and Social Care, the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs, Natural England, NHS England, Public Health England and the Ministry of Housing, Communities and Local Government. We will develop four local pilots across England, which will establish what is required to scale up green social prescribing at a local level and take steps to increase patient referrals to nature-based activities. We will conduct experimental workat the national level to understand where and why there is potential for rapid growth and what interventions can support and enable scaling up.110. The Decent Homes Standard review will also consider how improvements to communal space around social homes could make places more liveable, safe and comfortable. This will build on the regulator’s existing Neighbourhood and Community consumer standard requiring landlords, working with other agencies, tokeep the neighbourhood and communal areas associated with the homes they own clean and safe, and to promote social and environmental wellbeing.111. It is crucial for all communities, including those in social housing, and for all age groups to have access to a range of open and green spaces for leisure, recreation and play. These spaces should be well defined, easily accessible and safe with high quality landscaping including trees where appropriate, to support the physical health and wellbeing for all.1. 
27 https://greenhomesgrant.campaign.gov.uk/28 https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/social-housing-decarbonisation-fund-demonstrator/social-housing-decarbonisation-fund- demonstrator-programme-overview29 https://www.gov.uk/government/speeches/george-eustice-speech-on-environmental-recovery-20-july-2020The Charter for Social Housing Residents – Social Housing White Paper 55
56 The Charter for Social Housing Residents – Social Housing White Paper

112. The importance of including open space in development is clear from our planning policy and guidance. The National Planning Policy Framework encourages housing developments that promote health and wellbeing, with a high standard of amenity for existing and future users. It statesthat planning policies should assess the need for different types of open space in each area, and then seek to accommodate it. In their report the Building Better, Building Beautiful Commission made nature one of their priority themes and noted that green spaces should be integral to the urban fabric. We welcome their recommendations and look forward to responding to their report in due course.113. The supporting National Design Guide shows how access to high quality and attractive green infrastructure, including open spaces, can be integral to new development, to encourage physical activity and to promote health, wellbeing and social inclusion. We are working to reflect theprinciples of the forthcoming Framework of Green Infrastructure Standards in national planning guidance, and the Government’s forthcoming guidance on producing local design codes will set out more detailed parameters for developmentin different types of location including the arrangement and proportions of streets and urban blocks, positioning and hierarchy of public and green spaces, placement of street trees, private amenity space such as gardens and balconies, and high quality cycling and walking provision. This guidance will apply to new development, including social housing. Guidance on producing local design codes will form part of the Government’s planning practice guidance on design quality to support the National Planning Policy Framework and can be used to guide decisions for planning applications.114. The Planning for the Future White Paper also includes a proposal by Government to enable more and better green space in development. The consultation closed on 29 October. Following consideration of the consultation responses, theGovernment will publish a response in due course.
Supporting positive mental and physical health115. We know that around 24% of working age disabled people live in social housing30. It is therefore vital that these people get the support they need. In 2020/21 we have provided a total of £505 million for the Disabled Facilities Grant (DFG)31. This capital grant, administered by local authorities in England, can contribute to the cost of adapting an eligible disabled person’s home. Eligible applicants can include older people, mentally or physically disabled people, as well as those with autism and learning difficulties. The DFG supports the installation of adaptations such as stair-lifts, level access showers and ramps; all things which can help enable people to live safely and independently at home. People of all ages can apply to their local authority for a DFG. In 2016/17 over 33% of recipients of the funding were housing association tenants, which equates to over 15,000 homes being improved. Local authorities are under a statutory duty32 to provide home adaptations to those who qualify for the grant, which the individual local authority funds.116. Approximately one in four people report living with a mental health issue.33 This is why, in addition to boosting green spaces, we are committed to expanding provision on mental health. This Government is committed to expanding access to mental health services through the NHS Long Term Plan. Investment of at least a further £2.3 billion a year by 2023/24 will ensure that the NHS provides high quality, evidence-based mental health services to an additional 2 million people. Alongside this expansion, we also want to make sure that wider public services support people to stay mentally well, recover from mental ill-health and live well with mental illness. Secure, safe and decent housing can support positive mental health.1. 
30 https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/healthandsocialcare/disability/bulletins/disabilityandhousinguk/201931   https://www.housinglin.org.uk/_assets/Resources/Housing/Policy_documents/505-million-for-Disabled-Facilities-Grants-in-2020-21.pdf32 https://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/1996/53/contents33 NHS Digital (2015) Health Survey for England 2014. The 2014 Adult Psychiatric Morbidity Survey further shows that 1 in 6 adults had a common mental disorder.The Charter for Social Housing Residents – Social Housing White Paper 57
“We recognise that domestic pets also bring joy, happiness and comfort to people’s lives, helping their owners through difficult times and improving their mental and physical wellbeing.”58 The Charter for Social Housing Residents – Social Housing White Paper
117. We recognise that domestic pets also bring joy, happiness and comfort to people’s lives, helping their owners through difficult times and improving their mental and physical wellbeing. We know many social landlords normally give permission for tenants to keep pets depending on the location, provided they are well looked after and do not adversely affect the lives of neighbours and those living nearby. We encourage all social landlords to adopt similar policies.118. We have heard how, in social housing, people’s experience, including stigma, can be shapedby their interactions with frontline staff. Going forward, we want to ensure that frontline social housing staff have the right knowledge and skills to work sensitively with people who have or are at risk of developing mental health problems, building on examples of good practice in the sector. Our review of professionalisationwill consider how well housing staff are equipped to work with people with mental health needs and we will encourage best practice for landlords working with those with mental health needs.119. We are aware of emerging evidence about the relationship between housing and health, including about housing’s role in thetransmission of COVID-19. We will continue to engage with the latest evidence on the impact of housing conditions on health, including COVID-19 transmission, and are actively considering options to mitigate these impacts.Supporting tenants facinganti-social behaviour and crime120. Tenants in social housing are more likely to be victims of crime and experience anti-socialbehaviour (ASB). These are corrosive behaviours, and this Government has been clear that they are unacceptable in all forms. Tenants havea right to feel safe in their homes, without the stress, fear and tensions that anti-socialbehaviour and crime can cause. The Government is committed to keeping our streets safe and cutting crime, including through ensuringthat homes and communities are secure. We passed the Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act in 2014 to give landlords a wide range of tools to tackle ASB. We also published statutory guidance in 2019 to support local areas to make effective use of these powers, which sets out the importance of focusing on
the impact of anti-social behaviour on victims and on their needs. The guidance gives police, local authorities and others greater clarity on how best to use the powers appropriately and proportionately. However, we heard that in some cases social housing tenants feel their landlordis not taking their concerns seriously or seeking to tackle the issues they face. Our new social housing tenant satisfaction measures (see Box A: Draft Tenant Satisfaction Measures) will include measures on responsible neighbourhood management, including tackling anti-social behaviour, so landlords will have to be transparent and report onhow they are performing in this area. Tenants and the regulator will then be able to use this information to hold landlords to account and drive better performance. We will work with the Home Office and other partners to develop our understanding on how crime, and tenants’ perception of crime, can be measured and reported on, and what scope there may be to include them in tenant satisfaction measures.121. We also heard that it is not always clear to tenants who is responsible for responding to anti-social behaviour when they raise concerns. People do not know who to turn to, and what help and support to expect when they do. This has led to tenants feeling frustrated and voicing understandable concerns that some landlords fail to help or simply try to ‘pass the buck’. To help tenants and landlords we will clarifythe different responsibilities that police, local authorities and their landlords have in tackling anti-social behaviour. We will make it clear to tenants who can give them the most appropriate support and assistance. This will include information on the Community Trigger arrangements (also known as the ASB Case Review). This gives victims of persistent anti- social behaviour reported to any of the main responsible agencies (such as local authorities,police or a landlord) the right to request a multi- agency case review of their case where a local threshold is met. Information about this process is published on GOV.UK. We will work with the National Housing Federation and Local Government Association to encourage social landlords to inform residents of their right to make a community trigger application, and where appropriate, that they actas an advocate in supporting tenants to take an application forward with the relevant authority.The Charter for Social Housing Residents – Social Housing White Paper 59
60 The Charter for Social Housing Residents – Social Housing White Paper
122. We recognise from discussions with agencies involved in tackling anti-social behaviour and from recent research studies that, in some cases, the perpetrators of anti-social suffer from mental health problems or have issues involving alcohol and drug use. In those cases, providing the right support and interventions can havea positive outcome in terms of preventing further offending behaviour. We will bring together a working group to shape our approaches to tackling this issue. For social landlords, linked to our proposals to review professional development, we will be looking at the training given to housing staff to increase their awareness and understanding of mental health issues.123. We also know we need to do more to prevent acquisitive crime in social housing, such as burglary and theft. The £25m Safer Streets Fund34 aims to prevent such crimes from happening in the first place. The fund is investing in crime prevention plans in 52 communities across England and Wales many of which include social housing, and also include activity to tackle anti-social behaviour.124. In addition, our National Design Guide, published in 2019, refers to the importance of designing out crime when developing newhomes, and Government’s forthcoming guidance on producing local design codes will set out how homes and neighbourhoods must be designed with safety and security in mind by applying the principles of Secured by Design35. This includes using passive design measures, such as ‘eyes on the street’ and appropriate layouts for homes.125. Finally, we know there are other serious issues affecting some vulnerable tenants and we want to stamp these out. One such example is“county lines” which, in some areas, has resulted in gangs using young people and vulnerable adults to spread drugs across the country. Gangs will use a vulnerable person’s home to sell the drugs from. This “cuckooing” is a key part ofthe gangs’ strategy. We want to see all housing associations and local authority landlordsusing their knowledge of vulnerable tenants to monitor and support those tenants who may be at risk. We know that there have been examples where landlord intervention with other agencies has resulted in preventing vulnerable people from being exploited by these gangs. It is vital
that they work together with bodies, such as the police, to maximise this impact.126. We will continue to identify opportunities to reduce crime and anti-social behaviour including encouraging landlords to developpractical solutions to tackle crime and anti-social behaviour in their areas.Integrating social housing in communities127. Social homes are a vital part of diverse communities across the country. Yet residents told us they often felt stigmatised, and thata shift was needed in the way residents are perceived and treated. Some said that they were made to feel like ‘second class citizens’. We heard examples of social housing residents being denied access to certain shared facilities or spaces, leading to segregation from their neighbours and wider communities.128. It is vital that social housing is treated as an integral and valued part of our housing system, rather than being separated or segregated from other forms of housing. That aspirationis reflected in the National Planning Policy Framework which states that planning policies and decisions should aim to achieve healthy, inclusive and safe places. It also emphasises the need for planning policies and decisions to promote social interaction and provide shared spaces and facilities. It is supported by our planning practice guidance on Design: Process and Tools, published in October2019, which includes guidance on the effective engagement of communities in shaping the design of their neighbourhoods.
34  https://www.gov.uk/government/news/safer-streets-fund-to-tackle-burglary-and-theft35 https://www.securedbydesign.com/The Charter for Social Housing Residents – Social Housing White Paper 61
129. One significant way in which the planning system supports the creation of mixed communities is through developer contributions (via planning obligations – also known as Section 106 agreements). Developer contributions currently deliver around half of all new affordable housing, most of which is delivered on-site. This has played an important role in securing affordable housing as part of mixed-tenure development.130. Under the Government’s proposals to reform the planning system, set out in the Planning for the Future White Paper, the current system of developer contributions would be replaced with a new Infrastructure Levy which would be charged as a fixed proportion of the development value. These reforms aim toprovide greater certainty and transparency. The White Paper includes a clear commitmentto ensure that, under the Infrastructure Levy, affordable housing provision supported through developer contributions is kept at least at current levels – and that it is still delivered on-site to ensure that new development continues to support mixed communities. We will continueto work with the social housing sector to ensure that our planning reforms achieve these objectives.131. It is unacceptable that social tenants should be denied access to shared spaces and facilities and we want to see housing designed in a waythat prevents this. We have published the National Design Guide which promotes social interaction through encouraging well-integrated housing and other facilities that are designedto be tenure neutral and socially inclusive, with spaces that can be shared by all residents. Local planning authorities will be expected to develop their own design codes or guides, taking into consideration the Government’s forthcoming guidance on producing local design codes. These will set out clear parameters for what good quality design looks like in their area, following appropriate local consultation.132. In 2018, we published an Integrated Communities Strategy Action Plan setting out cross-government measures to build integrated communities and challenge segregation. Integration Areas were announced in the Integrated Communities Strategy Green Paper with the aim that government would work with local authorities and other partners toco-design integration strategies to take tailored actions to address the challenges specific to their place. We have worked with three ofour five existing integration areas to consider
how to maximise the use of levers in housing and planning policy locally to tackle social and residential segregation. We would aim to build on the results of their work to embed innovative approaches to housing.Considering how to ensure social housing is allocated fairly133. Local authorities’ allocation schemes are the primary system through which people access social housing. These schemes must be set in line with legislation, regulations and statutory guidance. In the social housing Green Paper, we announced an evidence collection exercise to help us understand how the system is playing out in local areas.134. The exercise has brought together evidence from a survey of a number of local housing authorities, case studies, interviews and focus groups with representatives from across the sector. The results will be published shortly and we will consider the findings to ensure that housing is allocated in the fairest way possible and achieves the best outcomes forlocal places and communities. This will include considering:ï how to improve joint working between local authorities and housing associations to ensure that social housing is being allocated efficiently;ï how to remove barriers to access to social housing for homeless households; andï how to ensure vulnerable households are able to navigate local authorities’ allocation systems.135. While the allocation legislation ensures that people with disabilities are prioritised for social housing, we heard that that allocation systems sometimes fail to match adapted (or adaptable) homes to the people who need them, often because of a lack of data about the accessible social housing stock in the area. Accordingly, we will also look at how we can improve access to suitable homes for disabled people.1. 
62 The Charter for Social Housing Residents – Social Housing White Paper
Supporting tenants facing domestic abuse136. Landlords have a role to play in supporting the victims of domestic abuse. They are well-placed to identify early signs of abuse and through allocations policies can offer an escape to safe housing. Many are already committed to taking action in support of this through sector-led initiatives such as the ‘Making a Stand’ pledge36.137. The Domestic Abuse Bill will place a statutory duty on county and unitary councils in England (excluding London Boroughs), as well as the Greater London Authority and the Isles of Scilly Council, to work with other bodies to develop a strategy for, and commission services to provide support for victims of domestic abuse and their children within safe accommodation. Landlords must work with local authorities to deliver this requirement, and it is important that this expectation is reflected in the regulatory standards. We will expect the Regulator of Social Housing to review and amend its regulatory standards to make it clear that landlords should have a policy setting out how they should tackle issues surrounding domestic abuse, working with other agencies as appropriate.Supporting the Armed Forces community138. We are committed to ensuring that those who have put their life on the line for their country, and those who give up so much to support them to do so, get the priority for social housing they deserve.139. Delivering on the Armed Forces Covenant the Government changed the law in 2012 so that seriously injured, ill or disabled Service personnel, and former members of the Armed Forces, with urgent housing needs are always given high priority for social housing. We also introduced regulations to ensure that serving personnel and those who are recently discharged do not lose their qualification rights because of the necessity to move from base to base. Both of these changes apply also to bereaved spouses or civil partners who have to leave Ministry of Defence provided accommodation, and to serving and former members of the Reserve Armed Forces who have been seriously injured or disabled in service.140. 
In June this year, delivering on a commitment in the Government’s response to the Veterans Strategy consultation, we published statutory guidance for local authorities to improve access to social housing for members of the ArmedForces, veterans, and their families. The guidance will ensure that service personnel and veterans suffering from mental health are prioritised for social housing; that those who separate from their partners in the Armed Forces are exempted from any local connection test; and that local authorities can identify applications from members of the Armed Forces community to ensure they are considered appropriately.
36 https://www.cih.org/policy/make-a-standThe Charter for Social Housing Residents – Social Housing White Paper 63
  Chapter 7: To be supported to take your first step to ownership64 The Charter for Social Housing Residents – Social Housing White Paper
We are determined to increase the supply of new and beautiful social homes – and to ensure that as many social tenants as possible havethe opportunity to buy a home of their own.To increase the supply of social homes, we have:ï Built over 486,600 new affordable homes since 2010, including 142,400 for social rent.ï Announced our new £11.5 billion Affordable Homes Programme – the largest single investment in social housing for a decade – that will deliver up to 180,000 new homes.ï Announced a new £3 billion Affordable Homes Guarantee Scheme which aims to provide long- term, low cost and fixed rate debt finance to registered providers.ï Removed the cap on local authority borrowing to fund housebuilding.ï Consulted on whether greater flexibilities can be offered around how local authorities can use receipts from Right to Buy sales.ï Supported community-led housebuilding through the community housing fund.ï Announced we will consult on further guidance to provide clarity on rural exception sites policy, to ensure they are used to their full potential.To ensure that more social tenants have the opportunity to buy a home, we have:ï Introduced a new shared ownership model that will be fairer, more consumer-friendly and more accessible.ï Announced that around half of the homes delivered by the new Affordable Homes Programme will be for affordable home ownership.ï Announced a new Right to Shared Ownership, meaning that most new grant-funded housing association homes for rent will give residents the opportunity to purchase a 10% (or more) stake in their home and to purchase further shares in future.ï 
Launched a pilot of Voluntary Right to Buy in the Midlands, giving thousands of housing association residents the opportunity to own their home.We are firmly committed to ensuring that new social housing supply is well-designed and beautiful. Local councils and housing associations have long delivered some beautiful and innovative affordablehomes, epitomised by the award of the country’s top architecture and design award - the Stirling Prize – to the Goldsmith Street development by Norwich Council last year37. We heard from residents of the importance of building more affordable homes, and the importance of good design in preventing poor perceptions and stigma. So we want to encourage more Goldsmith Street developments and support better design everywhere, building on the long tradition created by the Victorian housing philanthropists that have givenus model designs such as the Rowntree village at New Earswick, which is now pioneering new energy efficient homes. We have:ï Amended the National Planning Policy Framework and published a new national design guideto emphasise the importance of beauty and good design.ï Emphasised through our new National Design Guide the importance of building beautiful and well-designed social homes.Building more affordable homes141. Since 2010, over 486,600 new affordable homes have been built, including 346,100 for rent, of which 142,400 have been for social rent.38 But we know that we must do more. In September 2020 we announced the details of our new£11.5bn Affordable Homes Programme39, which represents the highest single funding commitment to affordable housing in a decade. The new Affordable Homes Programme will deliver up to 180,000 homes, with half the homes available for Social and AffordableRent, and the remainder for affordable home ownership through our new shared ownership model. To support our ambition to level up the country, affordable housing providers will be able to develop homes for Social Rent anywhere in England.
37 https://www.architecture.com/awards-and-competitions-landing-page/awards/riba-stirling-prize38 Live Table 1000 and Live Table 1012 – covers period from 2010-11 and includes provisional data from 2019-20 from Live Table 1012 https://www. gov.uk/government/statistical-data-sets/live-tables-on-affordable-housing-supply39  https://www.gov.uk/government/news/jenrick-unveils-huge-12-billion-boost-for-affordable-homesThe Charter for Social Housing Residents – Social Housing White Paper 65
142. The social housing Green Paper explored what difference providing long-term certainty on funding for new affordable housing would make to the ambitions of housing associations and other private registered providers. The new Affordable Homes Programme includes £2bn for long-term partnerships delivering homesup to 2028/29, giving housing associations the long-term certainty they have asked for in order to build more homes. This new investment builds on the existing £9bn Affordable Homes Programme which will deliver around 250,000 new affordable homes by 2023.143. The social housing Green Paper also trailed the role of guarantees in supporting housing associations to build more homes. At SpringStatement 2019 a new £3bn Affordable Homes Guarantee Scheme was announced, building on the success of the previous £3.24bn scheme. This aims to provide long-term, low cost and fixed rate debt finance to registered providers to increase the supply of additional new build affordable homes. We estimate that the new scheme will support the delivery of around 17,000 affordable homes and that the scheme will be open for business by the end of the year.144. Around half of all new affordable homes are delivered through developer contributions, which are negotiated as part of the planning system (in the form of Section 106 planning obligations). Under our proposals to reform the planning system, set out in the Planning for the Future White Paper, the current system of developer contributions would be replaced with a new Infrastructure Levy, which would be chargedas a fixed proportion of the development value. These reforms aim to provide greater certainty and transparency. We would ensure that, under the Infrastructure Levy, affordable housing provision supported through developer contributions is kept at least at current levels,and that it is still delivered on-site to ensure that new development continues to support mixed communities.145. 
Rural Exception Sites are small rural sites not normally used for housing but allowed to be used for Affordable Housing to accommodate households who are either current residents in the local area or have an existing family or employment connection. We also recognisethat Rural Exception Sites are important for the delivery of Affordable Homes in rural areas and will consult on further guidance to provide clarity on this policy, with the aim of ensuring that they are used to their full potential.Building more council homes146. Between April 2010 and March 2019, local authorities built over 26,100 new affordable homes40 but have the potential to build many more. We want to see a step change in local authority delivery. In October 2018 the cap on local authority borrowing to fund housebuilding was removed41.147. We want to see local authorities make the most of borrowing flexibilities and innovate to deliver homes for the future. We are keen for local authorities to take advantage of funding available through the Affordable Homes Programme. We want to see local authorities share experiences and good practice in housebuilding so they are well placed to build the next generation of council homes.148. To further support local authority house building, we are looking at whether greater flexibilities can be offered around how local authorities can use receipts from Right to Buy sales. A consultation exploring the possibility of this was published alongside the social housing Green Paper and we are considering the policy response.1. 
40 Affordable Housing Supply open data: https://www.gov.uk/government/statistical-data-sets/live-tables-on-affordable-housing-supply#open-data41  https://www.gov.uk/guidance/housing-revenue-account66 The Charter for Social Housing Residents – Social Housing White Paper
Community Led Housing149. Housing built by community-led groups, including community land trusts and housingco-operatives, can deliver high quality affordable housing that cannot be delivered by the mainstream market. Particularly in urban areas, community-led housing can be delivered through the conversion and refurbishment of existing buildings. Because the management bodies of community-led housing are typically drawn from the local and residential community, they are uniquely well placed to respond to the needs and aspirations of residents.150. An important feature of community-led housing developments is the strong sense of pride and belonging that they engender among their residents, and the associated benefits in terms of health and wellbeing. We have supported community-led housebuilding through the Community Housing Fund42 and we will consider how best to maintain that support going forward.42  https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/community-housing-fundThe Charter for Social Housing Residents – Social Housing White Paper 67
Building beautiful151. We are committed to developing more beautiful homes and communities. It should be an aspiration for all new developments. It helpsto create a sense of place and foster a sense of community. The ‘Building Better, Building Beautiful’ Commission was established in November 2018, to advise the Government on how to promote high quality design for new build homes and neighbourhoods, making them more likely to be welcomed by existing communities. The recommendations apply to all new homes, regardless of tenure. The finalreport of the ‘Building Better, Building Beautiful’ Commission was published on 30 January 2020. We welcome the report and will provide a formal response in due course.152. In the meantime, in 2019, we amended the National Planning Policy Framework and published a new National Design Guide to emphasise the importance of beauty and good design.Helping people into home ownership153. We are committed to supporting people that want to own a home to do so. We are delivering more new homes of all types, delivering 241,000 in the last year alone, the highest in over 30 years; and we have committed to deliveringat least a million more over this parliament. Approximately 50% of the homes delivered through the new Affordable Homes Programme will be for affordable home ownership, supporting aspiring homeowners to take their first step on to the housing ladder. Over 649,000 households43 have been helped to purchase a home since spring 2010 through Government backed schemes including ‘Help to Buy’ and ‘Right to Buy’, and we have cut stamp-duty for the majority of first-time buyers, helping over 540,000 people.44 These schemes are working and in 2018/19 the number of first-time buyers reached a 12-year annual high, and increased by over 87% since 2010/1145. However, we needto do more to support people to realise their dreams of home ownership.
A new shared ownership model154. Shared Ownership has a vital role to play in offering a route into homeownership to those who would otherwise struggle to buy a home. We know that there is more we can do to make Shared Ownership work better for those who need it most. This is why in September 2020 we introduced a new Shared Ownership model that will be more consumer-friendly and more accessible. The new Shared Ownership model will reduce the minimum initial ownership stakefrom 25% to 10% and will enable purchasers to then buy further shares in smaller instalments of as little as 1%.155. Shared owners, like other homeowners, are currently responsible for the full cost of any repairs from day one. This means that those starting off with a small stake can be left with large bills. This is why we have also introduced a 10-year “repair-free” period during which the landlord will cover the costs of major repairsfor new homes. For most people entering into Shared Ownership, the scheme serves as a first step on their journey as homeowners. The new repairs model will help make the transition from renting to homeownership almost frictionless. The changes will prevent new shared owners being hit with repairs and maintenance bills and better support them to put money aside towards buying more of their home.156. Together these measures will ensure Shared Ownership supports those who need it most by making it easier for hard working people and families to access and progress to full ownership. We are committed to continued investment in the delivery of Shared Ownership homes and will fund the new model through the new Affordable Homes Programme.1. 
43 MHCLG Calculation of Help to Buy and Right to Buy (24 September 2020) The figure of 649,996 households comprises of 96,420 Right to Buy local authority sales, 29,826 Right to Buy PRP sales, 272,852 Help to Buy: Equity Loan sales, 104,763 Help to Buy: Mortgage Guarantee sales (the Help to Buy: Mortgage Guarantee scheme operates across the UK, whereas all others in this note only operate in England), 5,694 Help to Buy: New Buy sales and 140,411 Affordable home ownership sales44 Quarterly Stamp Duty Land Tax Statistics https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/904092/ Quarterly_SDLT_2020Q2_Main.pdf45 UK Finance (previously Council of Mortgage Lenders), First-time buyers: new mortgages and affordability (18 February 2020)68 The Charter for Social Housing Residents – Social Housing White Paper
“We are committed to developing more beautiful homes and communities. It should be an aspiration for all new developments. It helps to create a sense of place and foster a sense of community.”The Charter for Social Housing Residents – Social Housing White Paper 69
“We are reinvigorating the home ownership offer for housing association tenants by introducing a new Right to Shared Ownership.”70 The Charter for Social Housing Residents – Social Housing White Paper
Supporting residents’ Right to Buy157. Over 60% of social tenants have said they would prefer to be owner-occupiers if they had a free choice,46 yet only a quarter currently believe they will ever be able to do so.47 This gap between ambition and expectation is not right.158. We remain committed to the Right to Buy, which has helped nearly two million residents to become homeowners since 198048. In August 2018 a pilot of the Voluntary Right to Buy was launched in the Midlands. This pilot has giventhousands of housing association residents in the East and West Midlands the opportunity to own their own home.159. The pilot is assessing how the Voluntary Right to Buy works in practice for residents and for housing associations. It is also testing that housing associations are able to replace the homes sold under the pilot and the portable discount, which enables a resident to use their discount to buy another housing association property where their home is not for sale.We will publish the full evaluation of the Midlands pilot.Right to Shared Ownership160. We are reinvigorating the home ownership offer for housing association tenantsby introducing a new Right to Shared Ownership. The Right to Shared Ownership will be attached to the vast majority of new grant funded homes for rent grant funded through the new £11.5bn Affordable Homes Programme. It will give many housing association residents the opportunity to purchase a stake in their homeof 10% or more and to purchase further shares in future when they can afford to do so. Tenants taking up this offer will benefit from the new Shared Ownership model that is more consumer-friendly and makes it more manageable for shared owners to increase the stake in their homes.
Supporting leaseholders in social housing161. The Government is committed to promoting fairness and transparency for all leaseholders, both in the social and private sectors, and ensuring that consumers are protected from abuse and poor service. That is why we are reforming the leasehold market by restricting ground rents on future leases to zero, banning new leasehold houses, strengthening redress, making it easier, quicker and cheaper to extend a lease or buy a freehold and reinvigorating commonhold and Right to Manage. Our White Paper reforms will also benefit leaseholders with social landlords, for example by increasing transparency on overall spend and performance by landlords, a stronger focus on managing neighbourhoods and communal spaces, and better engagement so that the concerns of leaseholders can be heard. Many leaseholders have told us that service charges can often be unclear, and it is hard to tell whether costs are reasonable. We are clear that service charges should be transparent and communicated effectively, and that there should be a routeto challenge or redress if things go wrong. An independent working group, chaired by Lord Best, examined how to raise standards across the housing sector, which considered how fees such as service charges should be presented to consumers. The group also considered issues such as the consultation process for major works, how to mitigate the risk of large and unexpected bills, as well as the reasonableness of other fees and charges faced by leaseholders. The working group has published its final report to Government; we are considering the report’s recommendations and will announce next steps through our leasehold reform programme.
46 Public attitudes to house building, October 2019 https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/ file/841815/BSA_House_building_report.pdf47 English Housing Survey, Headline Report 2018- 19 https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/english-housing-survey-2018-to-2019-headline-report48 Live tables on Social Housing Sales – table 678 https://www.gov.uk/government/statistical-data-sets/live-tables-on-social-housing-salesThe Charter for Social Housing Residents – Social Housing White Paper 71
GlossaryAffordable housing: housing for sale or rent, including social housing, for those whose needs are not met by the market.Affordable Rent: social housing provided as part of an agreement with Homes England, the GreaterLondon Authority or the Secretary of State where the rent is set up to 80% of market rent.Aluminium Composite Materials: Aluminium composite material (ACM) is a flat panel made from two thin aluminium sheets bonded to a non- aluminium core, between three and seven mm thick. ACM becomes ‘unsafe ACM’ when it has a polyethylene (PE) filler, which is highly combustible.Anti-social behaviour: conduct that has caused, or is likely to cause, harassment, alarm or distress to a person, or conduct capable of causing housing-related nuisance or annoyance to any person.Arms Length Management Organisation: an organisation that provides and/or manages housing on behalf of a local authority on a not-for-profit basis.Borrowing Cap: the limit set by Government that local authorities can borrow up to.Decent Homes Standard: the Government’s definition of what is a decent home and is set out in the publication A Decent Home: Definition andGuidance for Implementation It sets out that a decent home meets four criteria (a) it meets the current statutory minimum standard for housing (b) it is in a reasonable state of repair (c) it has reasonably modern facilities and services and (d) it provides a reasonable degree of thermal comfort.English Housing Survey: a continuous national survey commissioned by the Ministry of Housing, Communities and Local Government (MHCLG).It collects information about people’s housing circumstances and the condition and energy efficiency of housing in England.Green Paper: a consultation document produced by the government. The aim of this document is to allow people both inside and outside Parliament to give the department feedback on its policy or legislative proposals.
Homes England: the national housing delivery agency.Housing association: a non-profit organisation set up to provide affordable homes for those in need.Housing Revenue Account: a local authority account in which all income and spending arising from its social housing stock is managed.Leasehold: Leasehold is a form of ownership normally used for flats (but occasionally for houses) that is a long tenancy, providing the right to occupation and use of the property for a long period – the ‘term’ of the lease. The lease can be assigned during this term by the owner of the long lease.Leaseholder: A person who buys a leasehold property on a long lease.Memorandum of Understanding: a framework that sets out how two parties will work together on a particular issue.National Planning Policy Framework: a framework that sets out the Government’s planning policies for England and how these are expected to be applied.Private Registered Provider: a registered provider of social housing that is not a local authority. Most are housing associations.Private Rented Sector: homes for rent that are owned and managed by private landlords.Registered provider of social housing: a social housing landlord that is registered with the Regulator of Social Housing. This includes local authority landlords and private registered providers (such as housing associations and housing co-operatives).Right to Buy: this scheme allows tenants of local authorities and some housing associations, with a secure tenancy, to purchase their home, with a discount.Right to Buy Receipts: money arising from the sale of local authority homes sold either under the Right to Buy legislation or sold voluntarily to secure tenants at less than market value.
72 The Charter for Social Housing Residents – Social Housing White Paper
Right to Shared Ownership: is a new right introduced in 2020, which will give the vast majority of social tenants, living in new rented homes delivered by the Affordable Homes Programme 2021/26,the opportunity to purchase a stake in their home and then purchase further shares when they can afford to do so.Shared ownership: an affordable home ownership scheme that allows residents to purchase 25%-75% of a home and then pay a subsidised rent on the remaining share. Residents are able to buy further shares in their homes in minimum 10% instalments, and in most circumstances, up to full ownership.Social Housing: housing to rent below the market rent or to buy through shared ownership or equity percentage arrangements, that is made available to people whose needs are not adequately served by the housing market.Social Rent: low cost rent set in accordance with a government formula.Social Rented Sector: homes for rent that are owned and managed by local authorities and private registered providers.Tenant Management Organisation: local authority tenant led (by volunteers) groups who take responsibility for managing the homes they live in.Tenant Satisfaction Measures: a measurable value that demonstrates how effectively main objectives are achievedThe Housing Ombudsman: Appointed by the Secretary of State for Housing, Communities and Local Government in accordance with the Code of Practice published by the Commissioner for Public Appointments. The Housing Ombudsman Service is an executive non-departmental public body, sponsored by the Ministry for Housing, Communities andLocal Government.The Housing Ombudsman Scheme: Approved by the Secretary of State under Section 51 of, andSchedule 2 to, the Housing Act 1996. Membership of the Scheme is compulsory for social landlords (other than local housing authorities). A number of managing agents and private landlords are voluntary members.
The Regulator of Social Housing (“the regulator”):an independent regulator which regulates providers of social housing (including local authorities, housing associations and other registered providers). Its principal role is to promote a viable, efficient and well- governed social housing sector able to deliver homes that meet a range of needs.Voluntary Right to Buy: In October 2015, the National Housing Federation, on behalf of the housing association sector, made an agreement with Government to extend Right to Buy level discounts to eligible housing association tenants througha voluntary rather than statutory approach. An initial pilot ran during 2016/17 with five housing associations, and a larger scale Midlands pilot of the scheme was launched in summer 2018.White Paper: policy document produced by the government that sets out proposals for future legislation.The Charter for Social Housing Residents – Social Housing White Paper 73
  Annex A:Key measures for changing the regulatory regimefor social housing
Changes to the regulatory regimeThe White Paper sets out wide-ranging proposals to transform and strengthen the regulatory regime to ensure it holds all landlords to account for the services they deliver, drives good service for tenants and protects economic regulation. A list of all the changes to the regulatory regime we intend to make is set out below. Many of these changes will require legislation. Government will:ï Work with the regulator to establish a proactive consumer regulation regime with active oversight of landlord performance, whilst maintaining the principle of co-regulation. This will include:ï Introducing routine inspections for the largest landlords (with over 1,000 homes) with the aim of doing so every four years, to obtain assurance from landlords that they are complying with the consumer standards;ï Specific, reactive inspections and/or investigations where systemic issues of concern are brought to the regulator by tenants or their representatives, the Housing Ombudsman or others;ï Published findings from these investigations and inspections where a landlord is found non-compliant with the regulator’s standards.ï Legislate to remove the ‘serious detriment test’ as soon as Parliamentary time allows, to eliminate
barriers to the regulator adopting a proactive approach to monitoring and oversight of landlord performance on consumer issues.ï Change the regulator’s objectives to explicitly cover safety and transparency, and expect the regulator to review its consumer standards to ensure they are up to date and deliver its revised objectives.ï Legislate to give the regulator a power to publish a code of practice on the consumer standards to be clearer on what landlords are required to deliver.ï Expect the regulator to bring in a set of tenant satisfaction measures for all landlords on the things that matter to tenants, and expect landlords to report to every tenant on such matters at least once a year, if not continuously using technology.ï Legislate to place an obligation on landlords to identify and publicise a senior named person in their organisation who is responsible forensuring compliance with their health and safety obligations.ï Expect the regulator to require landlords to identify a ‘responsible person’ for consumer standards compliance, as part of a wider requirement to provide greater clarity on the roles and responsibilities of senior staff.ï Introduce a new access to information scheme for social housing tenants of housing associations and other private registered providers of social housing so that information relating to landlords is easily accessible to tenants.ï 
74 The Charter for Social Housing Residents – Social Housing White Paper
ï Expect the regulator to require landlords to evidence how they have sought out and considered ways to improve engagement with tenants.ï Legislate to strengthen the regulator’s enforcement powers to tackle failing landlords and to respond to new challenges, including:ï Giving the regulator the power to require a Performance Improvement Plan;ï Reducing the notice period to survey homes;ï Giving the regulator the power to arrange emergency repair work and recoup costs from the landlord where, following a survey, there is evidence of systemic landlord failure and other regulatory measures have not worked;ï Removing the requirement to ask the Secretary of State’s approval to use its own staff to carry out inspections; andï Removing the cap on the level of fines the regulator may charge.ï Ensure that local authorities are held to account for the performance of service provided by an Arms Length Management Organisation or Tenant Management Organisation, by:ï Asking stockholding local authorities that contract out management services to Arms Length Management Organisations to review their contracts to ensure they do not prevent the regulator from taking action in the event of non-compliance with its standards;ï Making it explicit that provisions in contracts between ALMOs or TMOs would be deemed void if they hindered the regulation in its exercise of its powers; andï Working with the regulator to set out an expectation for local authorities to self-refer to ensure that issues of concern to tenants are dealt with as quickly as possible.ï Expect the regulator to review and amend its regulatory standards to make it clear that landlords should have a policy setting out how they should tackle issues surrounding domestic abuse, working with other agencies as appropriate.ï Legislate to strengthen the relationship between the Housing Ombudsman and the regulator, building on the current Memorandum of Understanding to ensure that they can exchange information quickly and effectively to provide better protection for tenants.ï 
Maintain the robust economic regulation regime that is already working well and make sure the whole system is cohesive and balanced. Thiswill include ensuring that changes to consumer regulation do not undermine economic regulation.ï Refine the regulator’s powers to ensure it has the right tools to deliver its economic regulation function effectively with an evolving sector.This includes:ï Requiring landlords to notify the regulator of any change in control and refining the definition of ‘non-profit’ providers; andï Introducing a ‘look-through’ power so the regulator can follow money paid outside ofthe regulated sector to ensure probity.Delivering these changes is essential to ensuring that the needs of tenants are embedded in the cultureof all landlords, and will require significant change to the structure and expertise of the regulator, fromsenior leadership level downwards. To ensure that the regulator is equipped to deliver a proactive regulatory regime effectively, we will:ï Enable the regulator to set up an entirely new function, and make sure it is resourced and able to recruit the right new staff, including at senior leadership level, that have the right expertisein consumer regulation, customer service and tenant engagement to effectively deliver the new consumer regulation regime.ï Expect the regulator to develop a strategy for appropriate and ongoing publicity to make tenants aware of what it does and how to get in touch– both so they can understand and help shape consumer regulation.ï Broaden the skills mix and diversity of Board Members and increase the number of Members with consumer regulation experience.ï Work with the regulator to make sure that the regulator is resourced and able to recruit the right new staff with diverse background and skills, including at senior levels.ï Require the regulator to set up a statutory Advisory Committee to provide independent and unbiased advice on discharging its functions. This will not be a decision-making body.The Charter for Social Housing Residents – Social Housing White Paper 75

Third Party Certification GuidanceIntroductionThe office of the Biometrics and Surveillance Camera Commissioner in conjunction with three UKAS accredited certification bodies (IQ Verify, National Security Inspectorate and Security Systems and Alarms Inspection Board) has a two-step certification process. The purpose of this guidance document is to explain the processes and the steps you need to take towards achieving the Surveillance Camera Code of Practice certification.BackgroundThe Protection of Freedoms Act 2012 introduced the regulation of public space surveillance cameras in England and Wales. As a result, the Surveillance Camera Code of Practice was issued by the Secretary of State under Section 30 of the Act to ensure that the use of cameras in public places is regulated and they are only used lawfully, in pursuit of a specified purpose and in a proportionate way. The Code, like the legislation it supports, is enabling in nature and aims to balance the need for camera systems in public places with individual human rights such as the respect for home and private life, freedom of speech and assembly. The Code applies to the use of surveillance camera systems that operate in public places in England and Wales, regardless of whether or not there is any live viewing, or recording of images or information or associated data.The Code states that a relevant authority1 must have regard to the guidance in the Code when exercising any of its functions to which the Code relates. This includes the consideration of future deployment or continued deployment of surveillance camera systems to observe public places, the operation or use of any such surveillance camera systems, or the use or processing of images or other information obtained through the system.As part of the Commissioner’s role to raise standards, he has a Self- Assessment Tool on his website which enables organisations to find out how well they comply with the Surveillance Camera Code of Practice. Following on from that is the certification process that will enable organisations to be audited against the Code by a third party with the view to receiving a certification mark and a certificate issued by the Biometrics and Surveillance Camera Commissioner. This process will help to raise standards in the1 These are defined at section 33 of the Protection of Freedoms Act 2012: http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2012/9/section/33/enacted
industry and enable organisations to demonstrate their compliance with the Code.Certification will be scheme specific, so when you apply you will need to state what scheme you want to be certified for. For example, this could be a main town centre CCTV scheme, a housing scheme, an environmental surveillance scheme, a mobile or fixed ANPR site, Body Worn Video or drone deployment.Who is certification for?The surveillance camera certification process is available for any organisation that operates surveillance in a public space. This could be a small or large organisation that wants to demonstrate as part of its public accountability arrangements to demonstrate how it has complied with the Surveillance Camera Code of Practice and evidence good practice. This process is primarily for those that must have regard to the Code – the regulated sector – and in particular the local authorities who own a large proportion of the systems within the regulated sector. Any non-regulated authorities or bodies can also apply for certification. If you are a voluntary adopter of the Code, you are encouraged to apply for certification.What are the criteria for Certification Bodies to offer SCC certification?There are a number of criteria that a certification body must meet before it can offer certification against the Code. The criteria for the certification bodies are as follows. The Certification Body:1. Must be UKAS accredited against the current ISO/IEC 17065 to provide product conformity certification in relation to BS7958 for Closed-Circuit Television (CCTV) Management and Operation.2. Must provide the Commissioner with recent examples of a certification report for product conformity in relation to BS7958 as well as the checklist and/ or reference material used during audit.3. Will need to assure the competency of each member of their audit team who would conduct any assessments in relation to the Surveillance Camera Code of Practice (this could be through qualification or samples of the auditor’s relevant reports).4. Should provide details of relevant fees and charges as well as the potential amount of time that will be allocated to the audit. In addition to the above the certification bodies will need to meet the conditions outlined in the framework document.What’s in it for me?Any organisation that successfully achieves certification will be awarded a certificate of compliance from the Biometrics and Surveillance Camera Commissioner and will be able to make use of the Commissioner’s
certification mark on their website and other communications to indicate their compliance with the Code. This will go a long way to reassure members of the public and other organisations that your organisation is complying with the Code and its high standards when using surveillance camera systems and the information gathered from them in the appropriate manner. In addition, a list of organisations achieving certification will be published on the Commissioner’s website and may be referred to in the Commissioner’s reports.What steps do I need to take?1. Decide on what type of certification you want (see details below): Step 1: Desk top certificationStep 2: Full certificationWhatever step you decide to apply for, you will need to complete and submit the Self-Assessment Tool to one of the certification bodies as well as having the documents listed below available should they be requested. The information you provide will enable the certification bodies to assess your readiness for certification.Documents required:ï Completed Self-Assessment Toolï Organisations code of practiceï Information sharing agreementsï Details on number of cameras the scheme hasï Procedures Manualï Privacy Impact Assessments (if available)ï Operational Requirement (If available)2. Contact any of the certification bodies that offer the Surveillance Camera Commissioner certification. The certification bodies will inform the Commissioner of your application for certification.a. IQ Verifyb. National Security Inspectoratec. Security Systems and Alarms Inspection BoardStep 1: Desk top certificationThe desk top certification is aimed at organisations that are working hard to achieve full compliance with the Code but are aware that they need more time to become fully compliant. However, you must ensure that you are compliant with your obligations under the Data Protection Act 2018 and with the Human Rights Act 1998 and any corresponding human right obligations. This certification is valid for one year and is awarded with the understanding that within the year the organisation will work on putting measures in place to be in a position to apply for the full certification.
This process involves completing and submitting the Self-Assessment Tool to one of the certification bodies. You will be required to confirm the availability of related evidence (see above). The completed form and documents will then be audited by the certification body who may contact you for more information before recommending your organisation to the Commissioner for Step 1 certification.If you are recommended for Step 1 certification, you will be issued with a certificate of compliance from the Commissioner and a certification mark which will be valid for a year. You will receive a reminder to apply for full certification at the end of nine months and again at the end of the 12 months. If you do not apply for full certification, you will no longer be able to use the certification mark. However, in exceptional cases (such as waiting for funding approval etc.) you may be able to reapply for the desk top certification, subject to the discretion of the Biometrics and Surveillance Camera Commissioner.Step 2: Full certificationFull certification is aimed at those organisations that are close to or fully compliant with the Code. This certification will be valid for five years, subject to an annual review of your system. As stated above, you will need to complete and submit the Self-Assessment Tool and have the relevant documents available for assessment. The certification body will then contact you to arrange a date for a full audit of your system.The full certification process involves an auditor from one of the above- mentioned organisations visiting your organisation’s control room to audit the system, cameras and procedures working with a check list against the 12 guiding principles in the Code. So long as you do not have any serious non- compliance issues the auditor will produce a report for the Commissioner recommending full certification. In some cases, you may be asked to make changes or put measures in place to address certain issues before you achieve certification.If you are recommended for certification, you will be issued with a certificate of compliance from the Commissioner and will be entitled to use the Commissioner’s certification mark throughout the five-year period subject to your annual review.Annual reviewThe Code requires you to complete an annual review. You will need to document this review and submit it to the certification body for a desktop review to ensure that you are still Code compliant. (This will be subject to the same conditions as the Step 1 process). If the certification body identifies any non-compliance issues you will have six weeks to take the appropriate steps to resolve any non-compliance notices that may have been issued.The Biometrics and Surveillance Camera Commissioner reserves the right to revoke an organisations’ certification, for serious breaches or consistent non-
compliance. Towards the end of the five years you will need to re-apply for full certification.
Books and journals Case studies Expert Briefings Open Access Publish with usAdvanced  searchTo read this content please select one of the options below:Purchase optionsRent this content from DeepDyve Rent from DeepDyveOther accessYou may be able to access this content by logging in via your Emerald profile. LoginIf you think you should have access to this content, click to contact our support team. Contact usTo protect and serve: a review of initiatives to support of police officers to better meet the needs of older adultKristina Marie Kokorelias (the Department of Occupational Sciences and Occupational Therapy, Temerty Faculty of Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada; Rehabilitation Sciences Institute, Temerty Faculty of Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada; Section of Geriatric Medicine, Sinai Health, Toronto, Canada and The National Institute on Ageing, Toronto Metropolitan University, Toronto, Canada)Adam Christopher (the Department of, Temerty Faculty of Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada) Anna Grosse (the Section of Geriatric Medicine, Sinai Health, Toronto, Canada)Joshua Wyman (the Department of, Western University, London, Canada)Samir K. Sinha (the Section of Geriatric Medicine, Sinai Health, Toronto, Canada; Department of Family and Community Medicine, Temerty Faculty of Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada; Department of Medicine, Temerty Faculty of Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada and The National Institute on Ageing, Toronto Metropolitan University, Toronto, Canada)The Journal of Adult Protection ISSN: 1466-8203Article publication date: 1 January 2025Issue publication date: 29 January 2025
Downloads 77AbstractPurposePolice officers increasingly respond to incidents involving aging-related issues, where older adults are vulnerable and require tailored approaches. This scoping review aims to map initiatives aimed at enhancing interactions between older adults and police and evaluates outcomes. Findings inform the development of a geriatrics-focused police training curriculum to support age-friendly policing. A literature search across major databases and grey literature yielded 20 relevant publications. Three main initiatives were identified: geriatrics-oriented training programs, specialized geriatric police units and geriatrics-oriented policing guidelines. These insights highlight effective strategies for improving police responses to aging-related challenges and guide future research and policy in this domain.Design/methodology/approachThe study employed a scoping review methodology guided by the Joanna Briggs Institute Manual and PRISMA-ScR checklist. A comprehensive search strategy was developed and executed across multiple databases and grey literature sources. Screening and selection of relevant studies were conducted in duplicate, with data extraction focusing on key elements such as study objectives, design, interventions and outcomes. Thematic analysis was employed to synthesize findings from included studies, highlighting three principal initiatives: geriatrics-oriented training programs, specialized geriatric police units and geriatrics-oriented policing guidelines. This approach aimed to map existing evidence, inform the development of a geriatrics-focused training curriculum and identify best practices for age-friendly policing.FindingsThe scoping review identified 28 studies meeting inclusion criteria. Findings highlighted varied approaches to enhancing police interactions with older adults, emphasizing training as pivotal. Effective strategies included specialized units, tailored training programs and guidelines integrating geriatrics principles. Key outcomes encompassed improved officer knowledge, communication skills and attitudes toward older adults, fostering enhanced service delivery and community relations. Evidence underscored the importance of ongoing education and collaborative partnerships in optimizing policing responses to aging populations, advocating for sustainable, age-friendly policing practices.Research limitations/implicationsThe review’s limitations stem from primarily English-language studies, potentially overlooking non-English literature. Variability in study designs and outcomes poses challenges to synthesizing findings comprehensively. Limited generalizability may result due to geographic and cultural differences in policing practices. Future research could benefit from longitudinal studies assessing long-term impacts and broader inclusion of diverse policing contexts and perspectives, enhancing applicability and depth of understanding in optimizing police interactions with older adults.Practical implicationsPractical implications include informing policy makers and law enforcement agencies about effective strategies to enhance interactions with older adults, emphasizing communication skills and de-escalation techniques. Training programs should integrate age-sensitive approaches to improve officers’ awareness and response to older adults’ needs and vulnerabilities. Implementing community engagement initiatives can foster trust and cooperation, contributing to safer and more supportive environments for older adults in policing interactions. These efforts can ultimately promote enhanced well-being and reduced conflicts between law enforcement and older adults.
Social implicationsSocial implications highlight the need for broader societal awareness and education regarding the challenges faced by older adults in interactions with law enforcement. Addressing ageism and promoting respectful treatment can enhance community trust and reduce misunderstandings. Improved interactions between older adults and law enforcement can foster a more inclusive and supportive society, ensuring that older adults feel valued and protected. This can contribute to overall social cohesion and a more equitable experience for older adults in their interactions with law enforcement agencies.Originality/valueThe originality of this study lies in its focus on the intersection of age-related issues and law enforcement interactions, a relatively underexplored area in both gerontology and criminal justice research. By examining the perceptions and experiences of older adults and law enforcement officers, it provides valuable insights into mitigating ageism and improving interactions. The study’s findings contribute to enhancing understanding of how to promote respectful and effective communication between these groups, thereby offering practical implications for policy and training initiatives aimed at fostering better relationships and outcomes for older adults in law enforcement encounters.Keywords Geriatrics Older adults Police officers Law enforcement  Training EducationAcknowledgementsFunding source: This work was supported by the New Horizons for Seniors Program- CFP-NHP 25000/PNHA 25000- 2022-190.Declaration of interest: The authors report there are no competing interests to declare.CitationKokorelias, K.M., Christopher, A., Grosse, A., Wyman, J. and Sinha, S.K. (2025), "To protect and serve: a review of initiatives to support of police officers to better meet the needs of older adult", The Journal of Adult Protection, Vol. 27 No. 1, pp. 15-39. https://doi.org/10.1108/JAP-07-2024-0036Publisher:Emerald Publishing LimitedCopyright © 2024, Emerald Publishing LimitedRelated articles
Manage cookiesAll feedback is valuablePlease share your general feedbackReport an issue or find answers to frequently asked questionsContact Customer Support© 2025 Emerald Publishing Limited. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, artificial intelligence training and similar technologies.Services Authors  Editors Librarians Researchers  ReviewersAbout About Emerald Working for Emerald  Contact us Publication sitemapPolicies and informationPrivacy notice Site policiesModern Slavery ActChair of Trustees governance statement Accessibility