Serious Crime Act 2015Fact sheet: Part 2: Computer misuseBackground1. In 2010 the National Security Strategy identified hostile attacks on UK cyber space by other states and large scale cyber crime as a ‘tier one’ threat to national security. In response, the National Cyber Security Programme (“NCSP”) was established to help meet the objectives of the strategy. It is underpinned by £860 million of government investment over five years to 2016, around 10% of which has been invested to build law enforcement capabilities to tackle cyber crime. A coordinated approach is needed to tackle serious and organised crime, including cyber crime. The Government set out how we plan to achieve this in the Serious and Organised Crime Strategy, published in October 2013. It is essential that in tackling cyber crime the right framework of offences is in place and that there is clarity in how the powers that are used to investigate cyber crime interact with the offences designed to catch cyber criminals.The Computer Misuse Act 1990 as amended2. The Computer Misuse Act 1990 (“the 1990 Act”) sets out the offences associated with interfering with a computer (that is, hacking) and the associated tools (such as malware) that enable computer systems to be breached. It does not contain any powers. The 1990 Act, which applies UK-wide, makes unauthorised access to, or modification of, computer material unlawful.3. Part 2 of the Serious Crime Act 2015 amends the 1990 Act to:* create a new offence of unauthorised acts causing serious damage;* implement the EU Directive on Attacks against Information Systems; and* clarify the savings provision for law enforcement agencies.New offence of unauthorised acts causing serious damage4. The new offence in section 3ZA of the 1990 Act addresses the most serious cyber attacks, for example those on essential systems controlling power supply, communications, food or fuel distribution. A major cyber attack of this nature could have a significant impact, resulting in loss of life, serious illness or injury, severe social disruption or serious damage to the economy, the environment or national security. However, hitherto the most serious offence under the Act was the section 3 offence of unauthorised access to impair the operation of a computer. The maximum sentence of 10 years’ imprisonment which this offence carried did not sufficiently reflect the level of personal and economic harm that a major cyber attack on critical systems could cause.5. The new offence applies where an unauthorised act in relation to a computer results, directly or indirectly, in serious damage to the economy, the environment,1. 
national security or human welfare, or a significant risk of such damage (where damage to human welfare encompasses loss of life, illness or injury or serious social disruption). A significant link to the UK is required, so that at least one of the accused or the target computer at the time of the offence or the damage must have been in the UK, or the accused must be a UK national at the time of the offence and the conduct constitute an offence under the law of the country in which it occurred. The accused must have intended to cause the serious damage, or to have been reckless as to whether it was caused.EU Directive on Attacks against Information Systems (2013/40/EU)6. The EU adopted a Directive on attacks against information systems in August 2013. The aim of the Directive is to establish a set of minimum rules within the European Union on offences and sanctions relating to attacks against information systems. It also aims to improve cooperation between competent authorities in Member States.7. The Government has until 4 September 2015 to transpose the Directive into UK law. The UK is compliant with the Directive save in two respects: tools used for committing offences (Article 7) and jurisdiction (Article 12). The amendments in the Serious Crime Act address these gaps.Obtaining tools for use8. Article 7 of the Directive covers the tools used to commit computer offences (for example malware). This Article states that Member States should have offences in their legislation to criminalise the intentional “production, sale, procurement for use, import, distribution, or otherwise making available” of tools with the intention that it is used to commit any of the further offences in the Directive.9. Before the amendment to this offence, section 3A (making, supplying, or obtaining articles for use in offences under sections 1 or 3) of the 1990 Act covered all of the provisions under Article 7 with the exception of the offence of “procurement for use” of such tools. The prosecution was required to show that the individual obtained the tool with a view to its being supplied for use to commit, or assist in the commission of an offence under section 1 or 3 of the 1990 Act, in other words the offence required the involvement (or intended involvement) of a third party.10. 	Section 42 of the Serious Crime Act now extends section 3A of the 1990 Act to include an offence of obtaining a tool for use to commit a section 1, 3 or 3ZA offence regardless of an intention to supply that tool – thus removing the requirement of the involvement, or intended involvement, of a third party and ensuring that the offence covers individuals acting alone. Extending the extra-territorial jurisdiction of the 1990 Act offences by nationality11. Article 12 of the EU Directive covers jurisdiction and requires Member States to establish their jurisdiction with regards to a cyber offence being committed by one1. 
of their nationals. Before the amendment, the arrangements for the extra territorial application of the offences (that is, the ability for the UK courts to try cases in respect of conduct committed outside their jurisdiction) within the 1990 Act required the prosecution to show a significant link to the UK – that being that either the individual or the affected/intended affected computer needed to be present in the UK at the time of the offence.12. In response to Article 12, section 43 of the Serious Crime Act extends the categories of “significant link to the domestic jurisdiction” in section 5 of the 1990 Act to include “nationality”. This provides a legal basis to prosecute a UK national who commits any section 1 to 3A offence whilst outside the UK, where the offence has no link to the UK other than the offender’s nationality, provided that the offence was also an offence in the country where it took place.Savings13. Section 44 clarifies the savings provision at section 10 of the 1990 Act and is intended to remove any ambiguity for the lawful use of powers to investigate crime (for example under Part 3 of the Police Act 1997) and the interaction of those powers with the offences in the 1990 Act. The changes do not extend law enforcement agencies’ powers but merely clarify the use of existing powers (derived from other enactments, wherever exercised) in the context of the offences in the 1990 Act.Home Office March 2015
Serious Crime Act 2015Fact sheet: Extending extra-territorial jurisdiction to sections 5 and 6 of the Terrorism Act 2006Background1. The threat from ‘foreign fighters’, that is individuals who travel abroad, in particular to Syria and more recently Iraq, to engage in terrorist activities and who may pose a risk upon their return to the United Kingdom, is significant. Foreign fighters are not a problem unique to Syria and Iraq, but the scale of travel to those countries poses an unprecedented challenge. The Security Service is seeing more UK-linked individuals travelling there to take part in the fighting than any other place of conflict; it remains the number one destination for violent extremists anywhere in the world today.2. The Government is committed to doing everything it can to protect the public from individuals who prepare and train for terrorism and may seek to harm the UK or UK interests. While our priority is to dissuade people from travelling abroad, we must ensure that the legislation we have in place to prosecute individuals engaging in terrorism on their return to the UK, is as robust as it can be.3. Law enforcement partners, including the police, assess that where there may be evidence of individuals carrying out preparation activities and terrorist training abroad, a gap in our current legislation in respect of UK extra-territorial jurisdiction over activities carried out abroad, allows some of these dangerous individuals to go unpunished. This lack of prosecutorial capability in some instances could mean that terrorist attacks are successfully carried out.Measure to extend extra-territorial jurisdiction to sections 5 and 64. To ensure that we are able to counter this threat, and to support wider Government efforts to address the challenge posed by foreign fighters (including the measures in the Counter-Terrorism and Security Act 20151), section 81 of the Serious Crime Act 2015 extends extra-territorial jurisdiction to two offences within the Terrorism Act 2006: section 5 (preparation of terrorist acts), and extends the existing scope of extra-territorial jurisdiction in respect of section 6 (training for terrorism)2. Section 81 came into force on 3 March 2015, upon Royal Assent of the Serious Crime Act, and is available for use immediately by law enforcement agencies. As a safeguard, prosecutions cannot be brought retrospectively, that is, in respect of terrorist preparation or training undertaken abroad before the measure came into force.5. The effect of this measure is that our law enforcement partners will be able to prosecute UK-linked individuals and those who seek to harm UK interests, who1 https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/counter-terrorism-and-security-bill2 Extra-territorial jurisdiction (ETJ) to section 6 of the Terrorism Act 2006 is currently limited to circumstances where individuals’ terrorist training abroad involves one or more ‘Convention Offences’ contained at Schedule 1 to the Terrorism Act 2006. ‘Convention offences’ refer to those offences which EU Member States (including the UK) are required to extend ETJ pursuant to Article 14 of the EU Convention on the Prevention of Terrorism (16 May 2005).1 
have prepared abroad for an act of terrorism or who have trained abroad more generally3 for terrorist purposes, as if their actions had taken place in the UK. Any prosecution under this measure would require the Crown Prosecution Service to be satisfied that there is enough evidence to provide a "realistic prospect of conviction" and that the prosecution is needed in the public interest. In addition, the express consent of the Attorney General would be required to prosecute4. Each case will be considered on an individual basis.6. It is often difficult to prove evidentially direct engagement in terrorism, but the very purpose of the ‘preparatory’ or ‘precursor’ offences in Part One of the Terrorism Act 2006, under which sections 5 and 6 fall, is to prevent escalation of criminal behaviours and to intervene before the public is in danger from those who seek to cause harm.7. This measure closes a legislative gap in respect of two key terrorism offences and offer further opportunities for our law enforcement partners to take action against those involved in terrorist preparation.8. The changes are in keeping with the spirit of the existing legislation, given that the UK already takes extra-territorial jurisdiction in respect of a number of other terrorism offences5.Home Office March 20153 The measure will allow for an individual to be prosecuted for the commission, preparation or instigation of an act of terrorism in addition to a Convention offence, where the activity falling within section 6, takes place abroad.4 See section 19 of the Terrorism Act 2006.5 See section 17 of the Terrorism Act 2006.3 
Serious Crime Act 2015Fact sheet: Approval of draft decisions under Article 352 of the TFEUSection 8 of the European Union Act 20111. Section 82 provides, for the purposes of section 8 of the European Union Act 2011, for the approval of two draft decisions of the Council of the European Union to be made under Article 352 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union ("TFEU"). Article 352 of the TFEU is a legal base for measures that are in line with the objectives set out in the Treaties, but for which the Treaties have not explicitly provided the necessary powers. Under section 8 of the European Union Act 2011, a Minister of the Crown may not support an Article 352 decision unless the draft decision has been first approved by an Act of Parliament (there are limited exceptions to this requirement, but none apply in this instance).Draft Decision to repeal Council Decision 2007/124/EC, Euratom2. The first draft decision is in respect of the repeal of Council Decision 2007/124/EC, Euratom1 (“the 2007 Decision”). The 2007 Decision established, for the period 2007 to 2013, an EU funding programme to protect people and critical infrastructure against terrorist attacks and other security-related incidents. As the period covered by this programme had expired, the 2007 Decision was due to be repealed; it is the draft Council decision2 affecting that repeal which is the subject of this provision. The funding programme provided for by the 2007 Decision has been replaced by the Internal Security Fund (Police) which will shortly be adopted by the Council. The Internal Security Fund will continue to fund many of the activities foreseen by the 2007 Decision including the protection of people and critical infrastructure and the management of security-related risks and crises. The UK has not opted in to the Internal Security Fund measure pre-adoption; no decision has been taken by the Government on whether to do so post-adoption.The "Pericles" programme3. The second of the draft decisions to which section 82 applies relates to the “Pericles" programme. The Pericles programme was established in 2001 to protect the Euro against counterfeiting. The programme – which initially operated for the period 2002 to 2006 - provided for specialised, multidisciplinary training to tackle counterfeiting of the euro and for the exchange of personnel involved in protecting the euro, such as financial staff, police officers and lawyers. The Pericles programme applied not only to Member States participating in the single currency, but was extended to those Member States – including the United Kingdom - which had not1	http://www.biicl.org/files/4276_decision_2007-124-ec_est_spec_prog_on_prevention,_preparedness_and_consequence_mgmt_of_terrorism.pdf2 http://register.consilium.europa.eu/doc/srv?l=EN&f=ST%2015187%202013%20INIT
adopted the euro given the common interest in protecting a major currency against counterfeiting.4. Pericles was first renewed in 2006 and ran from 1 January 2007 until 31 December 2013. The European Commission concluded that the Pericles programme should be renewed again and the renewed programme (“Pericles 2020”) runs from 1 January 2014 to 31 December 2020. The legal basis for the renewed programme is Article 133 of the TFEU which relates to the single currency. It is again proposed to extend this renewed programme to those Member States which had not adopted the euro. That will be done by way of a measure (document number 16616/13)3 the legal basis for which is Article 352 of the TFEU. By continuing to support the Pericles programme, the UK will benefit directly from the training and information exchange provided under the programme to help combat counterfeiting by organised crime groups.Home Office March 20153http://www.europarl.europa.eu/meetdocs/2009_2014/documents/cls/cons_cons%282013%2916616_/cons_cons%282013%2916616_en.pdf
Serious Crime Act 2015Fact sheet: Child sexual exploitationRemoval	of	references	to	child	prostitution	and	pornography	in legislation1. In 2012 the Office of the Children’s Commissioner for England recommended that ‘a review of all legislation and guidance which makes reference to children as “prostitutes” or involved in prostitution should be initiated by the Government with the view to amending the wording to acknowledge children as sexually exploited, and where appropriate victimised through commercial sexual exploitation’. Concerns about the continued use of this terminology were reiterated to a cross party inquiry into child sexual exploitation chaired by Sarah Champion MP in April 2014, including its impact on attitudes towards victims and reinforcing misconceptions. A report, Real Voices, by Ann Coffey MP, published in October 2014, similarly recommended removing the term child prostitution from legislation.2. The Government supports the principle behind the removal of statutory references to child prostitution and section 67 of the Serious Crime Act makes the necessary amendments to the Sexual Offence Act 2003 (“the 2003 Act”) and other primary legislation to this end.3. The terms child prostitution and child pornography are referred to in the titles of sections 48 (causing or inciting child prostitution or pornography), 49 (controlling a child prostitute or a child involved in pornography) and 50 (arranging or facilitating child prostitution or pornography) of the 2003 Act, and in the body of those sections (and also in section 51, which contains definitions). Section 67 of the Serious Crime Act amends those sections of the 2003 Act so as to replace these terms with references to the sexual exploitation of children (and so recognising children as victims), but do not alter the scope of the relevant offences. The changes to the terminology used are intended to reflect a modern understanding of the position of children involved in such activities. They do not however change the behaviour to which the offences apply, which remains the recording of an indecent image of a person or the offer or provision of sexual services to another person in return for payment or a promise of payment.Amendment to section 1 of the Street Offences Act 19594. Section 67 of the Serious Crime Act also amends section 1 of the Street Offences Act 1959 so that the offence of loitering or soliciting for the purposes of prostitution only applies to adults. It, in effect, decriminalises under-18s selling sex in the street and in doing so again recognise children as victims in such circumstances rather than consenting participants (buying sex from an under-18 in any circumstances would remain illegal).Home Office March 2015
Serious Crime Act 2015Fact sheet: Domestic Abuse OffenceBackground1. Domestic abuse is a serious crime. It shatters the lives of its victims, and in some cases, leads to tragic and untimely deaths. That is why tackling domestic violence and abuse has been one of the Government’s top priorities.2. In recent years, much has been done to improve the response to domestic violence and abuse. The ‘This is Abuse’ campaign helps young people recognise abusive behaviours. The Government has increased the tools available to the police through the national roll-out of the Domestic Violence Disclosure Scheme, also known as Clare’s Law, and Domestic Violence Protection Orders.3. In September 2013 the Home Secretary commissioned Her Majesty’s Inspectorate of Constabulary (HMIC) to review the police response to domestic abuse. HMIC reported their findings in March 2014, and identified significant failings. The Home Secretary is clear that there must be an immediate and lasting change in the police response to domestic abuse. This means a change in culture from the officers in charge to those on the frontline. The Home Secretary chairs a National Oversight Group to make sure this happens and all police forces have now published action plans to address HMIC’s findings.4. However, it is also vital that the legal framework provides the best possible protection to victims. Statistics from the Crime Survey for England and Wales suggest that in 2013/14, 2 million people were victims of domestic violence and abuse. HMIC report that over one million calls were made to the police regarding domestic abuse incidents in the year prior to August 2013. Crown Prosecution Service figures indicate that 78,000 prosecutions were brought in 2013/14. This is the highest ever volume of prosecutions for domestic violence and abuse, but still falls significantly short of best estimates of prevalence.5. From 20 August to 15 October 2014 the Government ran a consultation that asked whether the law on domestic abuse needed to be strengthened to provide better protection to victims. Through the consultation the Government identified a gap in the law relating to patterns of abuse in ongoing relationships. 85% of respondents reported that the current legal framework did not provide adequate protection to victims. 55% of consultation respondents were in favour of closing this gap through a new specific offence of domestic abuse1.6. The new offence in the Serious Crime Act closes the gap in the current legal framework in order to capture repeated or continuous coercive or controlling behaviour, specifically where that behaviour takes place in an ongoing intimate partner or inter-familial relationship.1 https://www.gov.uk/government/consultations/strengthening-the-law-on-domestic-abuse
Law prior to the new offence7. Non-violent coercive behaviour which is a long-term campaign of abuse, may fall outside common assault, which requires the victim to fear the immediate application of unlawful violence.8. Some patterns of non-violent domestic abuse could be captured by legislation that covers stalking and harassment. However, the law on stalking and harassment does not explicitly apply to coercive and controlling behaviour in intimate relationships. As some respondents to the consultation noted, the law on stalking and harassment is not designed to capture the dynamic of sinister exploitation of an intimate relationship to control another, particularly where a relationship is ongoing. The element of control is not such a feature of stalking or harassment, which is generally intended to intimidate or cause fear.9. Domestic abuse adds an extra layer to such intimidation, with perpetrators operating under the guise of a close relation or partner to conceal their abuse, safe in the presumption that the victim is likely to want to continue a relationship despite the abuse. For these reasons, domestic abuse may be said to be more subversive than stalking. Even where stalking and harassment legislation may apply, Court of Appeal case law is a barrier (R v Curtis and R v Widdows) in that these behaviours have been found not to apply in ongoing intimate relationships where abuse is interspersed with affection.Changes to the law10. The Serious Crime Act explicitly criminalises patterns of coercive or controlling behaviour where they are perpetrated against an intimate partner or family member. Like stalking this behaviour, when viewed in isolation, may appear unexceptional, but the cumulative impact on the victim’s every-day life will be significant, causing the victim to feel fear, alarm or distress.11. We recognise the importance of ensuring this new offence is clear, proportionate and does not impact on ordinary power dynamics in relationships. As such, the repeated or continuous nature of the behaviour and the ability of a reasonable person to appreciate that the behaviour will have a serious effect on its victim, are key elements of the new offence.12. A defence is also included to provide a further safeguard against inappropriate use of the new offence. The defence will be available where the defendant can show that they believed they were acting in the victim’s best interests and that their behaviour was objectively reasonable. This defence is intended to cover, for example, circumstances where someone was a carer for a mentally ill spouse, who by virtue of their medical condition, had to be kept in the home or compelled to take medication, for their own protection or in their own best interests. In this context, the spouse’s behaviour might be considered controlling, but would be reasonable under the circumstances. The defence will not be available in cases where the defendant has caused the victim to fear violence.13. In line with stalking legislation, and in recognition of the damage coercive and controlling behaviour can do to its victims, the new domestic abuse offence attracts a maximum penalty of five years’ imprisonment or a fine, or both.Home Office March 2015
Serious Crime Act 2015Factsheet – female genital mutilationBackground1. Female genital mutilation (“FGM”) involves procedures that include the partial or total removal of the external female genital organs for non-medical reasons. The practice is extremely painful and has serious health consequences both at the time when the mutilation is carried out and in later life.2. The age at which girls undergo FGM varies enormously according to the community. The procedure may be carried out when the girl is newborn, during childhood or adolescence, just before marriage or during the first pregnancy. However, the majority of cases of FGM are thought to take place between the ages of five and eight.3. FGM has been a specific criminal offence in the UK since 1985 when the (UK- wide) Prohibition of Female Circumcision Act (“the 1985 Act”) was passed. The Female Genital Mutilation Act 2003 (“the 2003 Act”) replaced the 1985 Act in England, Wales and Northern Ireland1. It modernised the offence of FGM and the offence of assisting a girl to carry out FGM on herself while also creating extra-territorial offences to deter people from taking girls abroad for mutilation. To reflect the serious harm caused, the 2003 Act increased the maximum penalty for any of the FGM offences from five to 14 years’ imprisonment.4. To date no-one has been convicted of FGM in England and Wales. In July 2014, the UK Government and UNICEF hosted the first Girl Summit,2 aimed at mobilising domestic and international efforts to end FGM. The Government made a number of commitments for new legislation to tackle FGM.Current law5. Under the 2003 Act it is an offence for any person in England, Wales or Northern Ireland (regardless of their nationality or residence status) to perform FGM (section 1); or to assist a girl to carry out FGM on herself (section 2). It is also an offence to assist (from England, Wales or Northern Ireland) a non-UK national or resident to carry out FGM outside the UK on a UK national or permanent UK resident (section 3).6. Section 4 extends sections 1 to 3 to extra-territorial acts so that it is also an offence for a UK national or permanent UK resident to: perform FGM abroad; assist a girl to perform FGM on herself outside the UK; and assist (from outside the UK) a non-UK national or resident to carry out FGM outside the UK on a UK national or permanent UK resident.1 The Prohibition of Female Genital Mutilation (Scotland) Act 2005 replaced the 1985 Act in Scotland.2 https://www.gov.uk/government/topical-events/girl-summit-2014
7. The intention was for the extra-territorial provisions to catch offences involving those with a substantial connection to the UK but not those who were here temporarily. However, the Director of Public Prosecutions has highlighted a small number of cases where the CPS could not prosecute for FGM committed abroad because those involved were not, at the material time, permanent UK residents as defined by the 2003 Act.Extension of extra-territorial jurisdiction8. Against that background, section 70(1) of the Serious Crime Act 2015 (“the 2015 Act”) amends section 4 of the 2003 Act so that the extra-territorial jurisdiction extends to prohibited acts done outside the UK by a UK national or a person who is resident in the UK. Consistent with that change, section 70(1) also amends section 3 of the 2003 Act (offence of assisting a non-UK person to mutilate overseas a girl’s genitalia) so it extends to acts of FGM done to a UK national or a person who is resident in the UK.9. “UK resident” is defined as an individual who is habitually resident in the UK. The term habitually resident covers a person's ordinary residence, as opposed to a short, temporary stay in a country.10. These changes will mean that the 2003 Act can capture offences of FGM committed abroad by or against those who are at the time are habitually resident in the UK irrespective of whether they are subject to immigration restrictions. It will be for the courts to determine on the facts of individual cases whether or not those involved are habitually resident in the UK and thus covered by the 2003 Act.11. Section 70(2) of the 2015 Act makes equivalent amendments to the Prohibition of Female Genital Mutilation (Scotland) Act 2005.Anonymity of victims of FGM12. Reluctance to be identified as a victim of FGM is believed to be one of the reasons for the low incidence of reporting of this offence. It is anticipated that providing for the anonymity of victims of alleged offences of FGM will encourage more victims to come forward.13. Section 71 of the 2015 Act amends the 2003 Act to prohibit the publication of any information that would be likely to lead to the identification of a person against whom an FGM offence is alleged to have been committed. This is similar, although not identical, to the anonymity given to alleged victims of sexual offences by the Sexual Offences (Amendment) Act 1992.14. Anonymity will commence once an allegation has been made and will last for the duration of the victim’s lifetime.15. There are two limited circumstances where the court may disapply the restrictions on publication. The first is where a person being tried for an FGM offence, could have their defence substantially prejudiced if the restriction to prevent identification of the person against whom the allegation of FGM was committed is not lifted. The second circumstances is where preventing identification of the1. 
person against whom the allegation of FGM was committed, could be seen as a substantial and unreasonable restriction on the reporting of the proceedings and it is considered in the public interest to remove the restriction.Offence of failing to protect a girl from risk of FGM16. Section 72 of the 2015 Act inserts new section 3A into the 2003 Act; this creates a new offence of failing to protect a girl from FGM. This will mean that if an offence of FGM is committed against a girl under the age of 16, each person who is responsible for the girl at the time of FGM occurred will be liable under this new offence. The maximum penalty for the new offence is seven years’ imprisonment or a fine or both.17. To be “responsible” for a girl, the person will either have parental responsibility for the girl (such as mothers, fathers married to the mothers at the time of birth and guardians) and have frequent contact with her, or where the person is aged 18 or over they will have assumed responsibility for caring for the girl “in the manner of a parent”, for example family members to whom parents might send their child during the summer holidays.18. The requirement for “frequent contact” is intended to ensure that a person who in law has parental responsibility for a girl, but who in practice has little or no contact with her, would not be liable. Similarly, the requirement that the person should be caring for the girl “in the manner of a parent” is intended to ensure that a person who is looking after a girl for a very short period – such as a baby sitter – would not be liable.19. It would be a defence for a defendant to show that at the relevant time, they did not think that there was a significant risk of FGM being committed, and could not reasonably have been expected to be aware that there was any such risk; or they took such steps as he or she could reasonably have been expected to take to protect the girl from being the victim of FGM. The onus would then be on the prosecution to prove the contrary.Female Genital Mutilation Protection Order (“FGMPO”)20. At the Girl Summit on 22 July 2014 the Prime Minister launched a consultation on a proposal to introduce a specific civil law measure for the purpose of protecting potential or actual victims of FGM, closely modelled on the forced marriage protection orders in the Family Law Act 1996. 85% of the respondents to the consultation supported the proposal.321. Section 73 of the 2015 Act provides, therefore, for FGMPOs for the purposes of protecting a girl against the commission of a genital mutilation offence or protecting a girl against whom such an offence has been committed. Breach of an FGMPO would be a criminal offence with a maximum penalty of five years’ imprisonment, or as a civil breach punishable by up to two years’ imprisonment.22. The court may make a FGMPO on application by the girl who is to be protected or a third party. The court must consider all the circumstances including the need to secure the health, safety, and well-being of the girl.3 https://www.gov.uk/government/consultations/female-genital-mutilation-proposal-to-introduce-a-civil- protection-order
23. Under the new provisions an FGMPO might contain such prohibitions, restrictions or other requirements for the purposes of protecting a victim or potential victim of FGM. This could include, for example, provisions to surrender a person’s passport or any other travel document; and not to enter into any arrangements, in the UK or abroad, for FGM to be performed on the person to be protected.Duty to notify police of female genital mutilation24. At the Girl Summit, the Prime Minister also announced the Government’s intention to introduce a mandatory reporting duty for FGM. A consultation on how to introduce the duty ran from 5 December 2014 to 12 January 2015, and the Government’s response was published on 12 February. The intention is that the new duty will make professionals’ responsibilities in respect of FGM absolutely clear, and that it will aid police investigations and support an increase in the number of perpetrators caught and prosecuted.25. Section 74 inserts new section 5B into the 2003 Act which creates a new mandatory reporting duty requiring specified regulated professionals in England and Wales to make a report to the police. The duty applies where, in the course of their professional duties, a professional discovers that FGM appears to have been carried out on a girl aged under 18 (at the time of the discovery).26. The duty applies where the professional either:* is informed by the girl that an act of FGM has been carried out on her, or* 	observes physical signs which appear to show an act of FGM has carried out and has no reason to believe that the act was necessary for the girl’s physical or mental health or for purposes connected with labour or birth.27. The duty applies to professionals working within healthcare or social care, and teachers. It therefore covers:* 	Professionals regulated by a body overseen by the Professional Standards Authority (with the exception of the Pharmaceutical Society of Northern Ireland). This includes doctors, nurses, midwives, and, in England, social workers,* Teachers,* Social care workers in Wales.28. The duty does not apply where a professional has reason to believe that another individual working in the same profession has previously made a report to the police in connection with the same act of FGM. For these purposes, professionals regulated by a body which belongs to the Professional Standards Authority are considered as belonging to the same profession.1. 
Guidance about female genital mutilation29. Section 75 inserts new section 5C into the 2003 Act which confers on the Secretary of State a power to issue statutory guidance on FGM which relevant individuals are required to have regard to.Other steps being taken to tackle FGM26. Amending the law is not the only answer to securing additional prosecutions and convictions for FGM nor can it eradicate a practice that has been deeply ingrained in the culture of practising communities. The Government is committed to preventing and ending this form of violence against women and girls. Other measures announced at the Girl Summit included:* 	working to improve the police response to FGM. The College of Policing will issue new guidance to raise awareness of FGM among officers. In addition, Her Majesty’s Inspectorate of Constabulary will carry out an inspection of the police response to honour based violence with a focus on FGM and forced marriage;* 	a national FGM Prevention Programme, working in partnership with NHS England;* 	new briefing for schools on FGM and forced marriage commissioned by the Department for Education;* 	more funding to help charities raise awareness and a network of community champions with the cultural knowledge and connections necessary to challenge beliefs and change behaviour; and* 	a new cross-government specialist FGM unit working with criminal justice partners, children’s services, healthcare professionals and affected communities. The FGM Unit was launched on 5 December 2014.27. The Crown Prosecution Service is also working closely with the police to identify girls and women at risk of, or who have been subjected to, FGM.28. FGM is unlikely to end in the UK before it ends in Africa so the Department for International Development is leading a £35 million flagship programme to support the Africa-led movement to end FGM and is supporting work in 17 countries.Ministry of Justice/Home Office March 2015
Serious Crime Act 2015Fact sheet: Unauthorised mobile phones in prisonBackground1. Unauthorised mobile phones in prisons have been used by serious organised criminals to import firearms and drugs, coordinate escapes and to arrange murder. In January 2015, a serving prisoner received a life sentence for using a mobile phone to import machine guns into the UK. In 2013, the use of a mobile phone was instrumental in the escape of two prisoners near Salford, who were subsequently recaptured and sentenced to over 20 years in prison. In 2009, a prisoner was sentenced to 18 years for organising the importation of a large quantity of cocaine using a mobile phone from his prison cell. And in 2006, a mobile in prison was used to organise the killing of a gang leader.2. The National Offender Management Service (NOMS) uses a range of measures to prevent unauthorised phones getting into prisons, as well as measures to identify and seize phones in the possession of prisoners. In 2013/14, NOMS seized over 7,400 SIM cards and phones in prisons in England and Wales. All prisoners have access to approved fixed-line phones and are able to telephone the Samaritans free of charge.Current position3. Despite the success of measures to detect and seize phones in prison, mobile phone technology continues to advance and the size of handsets to decrease. This is making it easier for prisoners to conceal illicit phones and move them around the prison estate. Whilst it is a criminal offence to posses or use a mobile phone in prison without authorisation (section 40D of the Prison Act 1952), it is often not possible to attribute handsets and SIMs to specific individuals and prosecutions are rare. It is also a criminal offence to convey a mobile phone into a prison (section 40C of the Prison Act 1952).4. However, before the enactment of the Serious Crime Act there was no legal obligation on Mobile Network Operators to disconnect unauthorised phones in prisons.The new powers5. Section 80 of the Act will enable the Secretary of State (and the Scottish Ministers) to make regulations which will confer a power on the County Court (in Scotland, a Sheriff Court) to make an order to compel Mobile Network Operators to disconnect mobile phone handsets and SIM cards found by the court to be operating in prison without authorisation. This new power will allow NOMS and law enforcement agencies to disconnect mobile phones without the need to first take possession of and then attribute the handset or SIM to an individual.6. Before applying for a court order, NOMS will take robust steps to ascertain that the phones are being used without authorisation inside a prison. The court would need to be satisfied, on the balance of probabilities, that the phone is in prison and being used without authorisation, before ordering its disconnection. When a phone is disconnected from the network, the user will be able to make calls to the emergency services, should that need arise. This is an important safeguard.1. 
7. In the unlikely event that someone’s phone is disconnected in error, that person will be able to request an expeditious reconnection of their service, if it can be shown that the phone is not in use in a prison, or not in use in a prison without authorisation. Reconnection of their service can commence without the need to return to court to vary the order.8. The details of the scheme, including provision conferring rights on affected persons to make representations and provision about appeals, will be set out in regulations which must be debated and approved by each House of Parliament (or, in Scotland, by the Scottish Parliament) before they can come into force.Home Office March 2015
Serious Crime Act 2015Fact sheet: Offence of sexual communication with a childBackground1. In 2014 the National Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children (NSPCC) ran a campaign which suggested that a new offence was needed to target paedophiles who communicate sexually with a child. The Government considered the proposal and, at the WePROTECT summit in December 2014, the Prime Minister announced the intention to create a new offence in response to the campaign.Current law2. Sexual offences against children are sickening crimes and it is vital to protect victims. There are robust laws in place to deal with much of this abhorrent behaviour, enabling the prosecution of individuals for a range of existing offences, depending on the circumstances.3. For example, sections 8 and 10 of the Sexual Offences Act 2003 make it an offence to cause or incite a child under 13 or 16 respectively to engage in sexual activity. These offences carry a maximum 14 year sentence. They could, depending upon the circumstances, apply where a communication with a child (whether sexual or not) could be shown to have caused or incited some kind of sexual activity by the child including, for example, naked or semi-naked posing. However, these offences are unlikely to apply if a communication (for example, in the form of an e-mail or a text message) sent to a child contains sexual content but does not in any way ask the child to engage in sexual activity.4. Section 127 of the Communications Act 2003 makes it an offence to send a message by means of a public electronic communications network (including the internet) if its content is grossly offensive, indecent, obscene or menacing. Depending on the content of the message, this offence could apply where sexual messages or messages seeking a sexual response are sent to a child by some form of electronic communication, such as text, e-mail or phone (although it would not cover non-electronic written messages or verbal communication, or electronic messages sent by a private network such as a school intranet). This offence is not a sexual offence and does not automatically attract sex offender registration. It would not be appropriate to change that position as the offence also criminalises behaviour that may not be sexual.5. The publication of sexual material to a child or children may, depending on the content and circumstances, amount to an offence under the Obscene Publications Act 1959. This offence attracts a maximum five year prison sentence. It does not attract automatic sex offender registration as it can be committed through the dissemination of material which is not of a sexual nature.1. 
Creation of a new offence6. The UK’s laws to protect children are robust and respected across the world. But it is vital to remain responsive to changes and developments. This is particularly relevant to changes in technology and communications, which along with bringing major benefits to society, have given potential offenders new ways of contacting children to encourage or prepare acts of abuse.7. Section 67 of the Serious Crime Act 2015 creates a new offence of sexual communication with a child which will help ensure that young people are fully protected by the law and allow the authorities to intervene earlier to prevent more serious offending against children.8. The new offence criminalises a person aged 18 years or over who communicates with a child under 16 (who the adult does not reasonably believe to be 16 or over), if the communication is sexual or if it is intended to elicit from the child a communication which is sexual.9. The offence applies only where the defendant can be shown to have acted for the purpose of obtaining sexual gratification. Ordinary social or educational interactions between children and adults, or communications between young people themselves, will not be caught by the offence.10. The offence extends to England and Wales and is subject to a two year maximum prison sentence.Ministry of Justice March 2015
Serious Crime Act 2015       Fact sheet: Offence of possession of paedophile manuals Background1. The Government has been made aware of a potential gap in the law which allows the possession of written material that contains practical advice on how to commit a sexual offence against a child, commonly referred to as “paedophile manuals”.2. The material highlighted by the Child Exploitation and Online Protection Centre (CEOP) Command of the National Crime Agency is deeply disturbing. It is highly detailed and “instructive” in content. Amongst its in-depth content it gives advice on how to entrap or “groom” a child, where to find a child, how to offend and escape capture. Some of the material also includes pseudo-scientific advice endorsing paedophilia as relatively harmless and an “experience” to be enjoyed by the victims.3. The Prime Minister announced in April 2014 that he intended to act against the possession of these manuals.Current law4. Under the Protection of Children Act 1978, there is a strict prohibition on the production, circulation and possession with a view to distribution of any indecent photograph, or pseudo-photograph of a child under 18. The simple possession of an indecent photograph, or pseudo- photograph, of a child is also an offence under section 160 of the Criminal Justice Act 1988. These offences carry a ten and five year maximum prison sentence respectively but they do not cover written material.5. Alongside this, section 62 of the Coroners and Justice Act 2009 created a new criminal offence to make illegal the possession of “prohibited images of children” (which also covers non-photographic visual depictions of child sexual abuse, including ‘Hentai’ cartoons and computer-generated images of child abuse) with a three year maximum prison sentence.6. We believe the current criminal law, under the Obscene Publications Act 1959 would already cover the publication, online or offline, and possession for gain of the sort of material that has been brought to our attention.7. In some circumstances the law on encouraging and assisting the commission of offences would cover the use of this sort of material to encourage or assist other offenders to commit a sexual offence.1. 
However, the simple possession of such material is not covered by the existing criminal law.Creation of a new offence8. Our laws to protect children are rightly robust and respected internationally. However, it is important to ensure that we remain responsive to changes and developments. We have been made aware of the existence of this material, which we believe has been designed to facilitate sexual offending against children.9. To ensure the possession of such material is captured by the criminal law, section 69 of the Act creates a new offence which criminalises the possession of advice or guidance about abusing children sexually.10. There is a defence of legitimate reason for the possession of the material, which could include, for example, the police and the prosecuting authorities, those dealing with complaints from the public about content in the mobile and internet industries such as the Internet Watch Foundation, and those creating security software to block such material.11. In addition there is a defence that the person had not seen the material and did not know or have cause to suspect its nature, and another that the person had received the material unsolicited and did not keep it for an unreasonable time.12. The offence extends to England and Wales and Northern Ireland and is subject to a three year maximum prison sentence.Ministry of Justice March 2015
Serious Crime Act 2015Fact sheet: Offence of the Unauthorised Possession of Knives and Offensive Weapons within the Prison EstateBackground1. Section 78 of the Act makes it a criminal offence under the Prison Act 1952 to possess a knife or other offensive weapon in prison without authorisation.2. It is not currently a criminal offence to possess a knife, or bladed or pointed weapon or other offensive weapon within a prison establishment. The criminal offences for possession of such items, as set out in section 1 of the Prevention of Crime Act 1953 and sections 139 and 139A of the Criminal Justice Act 1988, are limited to possession within a public place or school. The purpose of the new offence is to address this disparity in the criminal law.3. Assaults and violence are a longstanding problem within the prison environment. If left unchecked, such behaviour can quickly destabilise a prison and threaten prison safety. Whilst assaults without weapons are more common, assaults with weapons are not infrequent and can inflict life-changing injuries on both staff and other prisoners. Prisoners most frequently manufacture weapons to attack other prisoners and to defend themselves, and also on occasion use weapons stolen from workshops or smuggled into the prison. In 2013, there were 14,125 assaults within prisons and Young Offender Institutions in England and Wales and 2,278 (16%) involved use of a weapon with 828 (6%) involving use of a knife, blade or sharp/blunt instrument.4. Weapon-enabled violence, including intimidation, is not acceptable in any environment and those who engage in this behaviour in prison should face a criminal charge, as appropriate. Control and order is a fundamental foundation of prison life; without it, staff, prisoner and visitor safety cannot be guaranteed and the rehabilitation of prisoners cannot take place.Current position5. It is currently only a criminal offence under the Prison Act 1952 to convey explosives, firearms or ammunition and any other offensive weapon (amongst other items) into or out of prisons, or to pass them to prisoners, or leave them in a place where they could come into the possession of prisoners. The possession of a weapon is currently dealt with through the prison adjudication system or, for staff, as part of internal disciplinary procedures.6. A prisoner who is found to be in possession of an unauthorised item in prison, including a knife, or bladed or pointed weapon or other offensive weapon, may be guilty of an offence against discipline within the prison1. 
(Rule 51(12)(a) of the Prison Rules 1999). A governor who finds a prisoner guilty of an offence against discipline may impose a caution, forfeiture of privileges for a period not exceeding 42 days, exclusion from associated work for a period of not exceeding 84 days, cellular confinement for a period not exceeding 21 days, forfeiture of property or removal from a wing or living unit for 28 days (Rule 55(1) of the Prison Rules 1999). An adjudicator who finds a prisoner guilty of an offence against discipline may impose any of the punishments that a governor may impose or an award of added days not exceeding 42 days, compared to the four years maximum for the equivalent criminal offence in the community.Changes to the law7. Section 78 of the Act creates a new offence1 where a person is in possession of a knife, or bladed or pointed weapon or other offensive weapon2 in prison without authorisation. The offence carries a four year maximum sentence on conviction on indictment or a fine or both. Alternatively, on summary conviction it carries a maximum six month prison sentence or a fine or both, to mirror the penalties for such offences committed within the community.8. There are circumstances where it is necessary for persons in prison (including prisoners) to have legitimate possession of bladed or sharply pointed articles, particularly knives and other tools which may constitute offensive weapons in another context. Provision is made in the Prison Act to enable authorisations to be provided in such circumstances.Intended effects of the new offence9. The main aim of the new offence is to address the disparity in the criminal law and to secure the ability to pursue criminal prosecution in the most serious cases of possession of weapons in prison. This will allow longer sentences for more serious offences, a greater deterrence effect against prisoners possessing weapons, and stronger public confidence in the fairness of the justice system.10. Criminalisation will also ensure that more serious weapon possession offences are punished through the Criminal Justice System (CJS) rather than the adjudication system, which is sometimes less appropriate for punishing such cases. Punishing more serious incidents of weapon possession through the CJS will also ensure that these incidents appear on the offenders’ criminal records, allowing the police to more adequately assess the risk of these offenders should they go on to re-offend. This information can also be used in any future sentencing decisions, where relevant.1 Contained in new section 40CA of the Prison Act 19522 The term “offence weapon” is defined in section 1(9) of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 as any article made or adapted for causing injury to persons or intended by the person having it with him for such use by him or some other person.
11. The new offence should also improve the safety of prison staff and prisoners by providing a deterrent effect, decreasing the incidence of weapons possession, and helping to protect potential victims of knife and other weapon crime in custody.Ministry of Justice March 2015
Serious Crime Act 2015Fact sheet: Offence of throwing articles into prisonsNew Offence1. Section 79 of the Serious Crime Act makes it a criminal offence to throw, or otherwise project, any article or substance (not already specified in the Prison Act 1952 or Prison Rules 1999) into a prison without authorisation. The new offence will apply to prison establishments within England and Wales only.2. The new legislation will serve to criminalise the throwing into prisons of new psychoactive substances (NPS), more commonly but misleadingly known as “legal highs”, which are a significant problem within prisons.3. The offence also captures other items that could pose a threat within a prison environment. There is almost never a good reason for throwing anything over a prison wall and doing so creates security risks and operational pressures; each case results in a security incident and even a seemingly innocent article would require investigation by the prison.Penalties and authorisation4. The new offence attracts a maximum sentence on conviction on indictment of two years’ imprisonment, an unlimited fine or both, or, on summary conviction, to imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months, an unlimited fine, or both.5. In a few rare cases there may be a need for an authorisation to throw something into a prison such as emergency services, prison intervention teams in the case of riots, or building work. These will be dealt with using existing authorisation process as set out in the Prison Act 1952 or will be covered by Crown Immunity.Current position6. It is currently a criminal offence under the Prison Act	to convey a range of items into or out of prisons.7. The Prison Act sets out three lists of items at reducing levels of seriousness with corresponding maximum penalties. Prohibited items are classified as List A, List B or List C items, as set out below:ï List A items – controlled drugs, explosives, firearms or ammunition and any other offensive weapon – Maximum penalty: 10 years’ imprisonment or unlimited fine or both.ï List B items - alcohol, mobile telephones, cameras, sound recording devices (or constituent part of the latter three items) –ï 
Maximum penalty: two years’ imprisonment or unlimited fine or both.ï List C items - tobacco, money, clothing, food, drink, letters, paper, books, tools, information technology equipment. – Maximum penalty: level 3 fine (currently, £1,000).8. While drugs are included at List A, a significant number of NPS do not contain controlled substances and therefore do not fall under this definition.9. Currently over 500 NPS are controlled by the Home Office under the Misuse of Drugs Act 1971 and are therefore already illegal to throw into a prison over the secure perimeter. However, it is known that there are many more NPS in circulation that are not controlled and the number is increasing as producers develop the chemical makeup of substances to evade contravening the 1971 Act. Those who throw non-controlled drugs into prison cannot be prosecuted.Intended effects of the new offence10. NPS in prisons is now a drug of choice amongst prisoners and is a significant and growing problem. NPS are having an increasingly destructive impact on prison security and order, and the welfare of individual prisoners and staff. Control and order is a fundamental foundation of prison life; without it, safety can not be guaranteed and the rehabilitation of prisoners can not take place. It is recognised that NPS has been linked to mental health problems and disturbed behaviour by prisoners, including violence.11. It is known that the throwing of packages containing contraband, including NPS, is a key method of supply. In some cases, it is coordinated by criminal gangs involved in a wide range of criminality. As indicated, while it is currently a criminal offence under the Prison Act to convey a number of items into a prison, including controlled drugs, non-controlled substances are not covered by this legislation. As such, those caught trafficking a range of NPS having been able to evade justice.12. The new offence addresses this and provides a robust legislative framework to deter and punish such offences and also the trafficking of other items that can pose a security or safety risk. It is vital that people who engage in this behaviour are able to face a criminal charge. It is unacceptable that criminals are able to evade justice for supplying drugs and other items which have such a destructive impact on our prisons and the welfare of all those who live and work within them.Ministry of Justice March 2015
 FGM001Application for aFemale Genital Mutilation (FGM) Protection OrderPart 1 of Schedule 2 to theFemale Genital Mutilation Act 2003Please read the accompanying notes as you complete this formNote: If you are an individual applicant, you MUST NOT serve the documents yourself on the person you are seeking the order against.1. About you (the applicant)Are you (tick only one box) the person who is to be protected by this order (see page 7)  a relevant third party (see page 7)Full nameIf you do not wish your address to be made known to the respondent leave this space blank and if you have not already done so, complete Confidential contact details form Form C8.See notes on page 7Address	Phone no. (optional)Date of birth (if under 18 years)For relevant third partiesName of organisation (if applicable)Position held in the organisation
Your solicitor’s details – if you are representing yourself leave blank Full nameName of firm
AddressDX no.
Reference no.Phone no.Fax no.Fee account no.
	2. About the person to be protected Mrs	 Miss	 Ms	 Other (please specify) Full nameIf you do not wish your address to be made known to the respondent leave this space blank and if you have not already done so, complete Confidential contact details Form C8.See notes on page 7.
Address
Date of birth (if known) Tick this box if you do not know the date of birth but you believe the person to be protected is under 18 years.
3. Your reasons for applying on behalf of the person to be protectedIf you are a Relevant Third Party complete this sectionState briefly your reasons including what you know of the circumstances of the person to be protected.
4. About the respondent(s)If there are more than two respondents please continue on a separate sheet.Respondent 1 Mr	 Mrs	 Miss	 Ms	 Other (please specify)Full nameAddress	Date of birth (if known)Respondent 2 Mr	 Mrs	 Miss	 Ms	 Other (please specify)Full nameAddress	Date of birth (if known)
5. The order(s) for which you are applyingState what you want the order to say (see examples on page 7). Give full details in support of your application below (continue on a separate sheet if necessary) or in a separate statement. Include details of any encouragement or enticement that the respondent has used.	Tick this box if you wish the court to hear your application without notice being given to the respondent. The reasons relied on for an application being heard without notice must be stated in the witness statement (verified by a statement of truth) in support. See notes for guidance on page 7.
6. At the courtIf you or the person to be protected requires an interpreter, you must tell the court now so that one can be arranged.Will you or the person to be protected need an interpreter at court? No  Yes, please specify the language and dialectIf you or the person to be protected has a disability for which you require special assistance or facilities, please state what is needed. The court staff will then get in touch with you if necessary.Please say whether the court needs to make any special arrangements for you or the person to be protected, to attend court (e.g. providing you with a separate waiting room from the respondent or other security provision).7. Other information
8. Other proceedings and ordersIf you are aware of any family proceedings or orders in force involving you, the respondent(s) or the person to be protected, then where known, state the type of proceedings.9. Statement of truth*[I believe] *[The applicant believes] that the facts stated in this application are true.*I am duly authorised by the applicant to sign this statement.Print full nameName of applicant solicitors firmSigned	Dated(Applicant) (Applicant’s solicitor)Proceedings for contempt of court may be brought against a person who makes or causes to be made, a false statement in a document verified by a statement of truth*delete as appropriateNote: If you are an individual applicant, you MUST NOT serve the documents yourself on the person you are seeking the order against.
Application for a FGM Protection OrderNotes for guidancePlease read these notes with the leaflet FGM700 - FGM Protection Orders
Section 1 – ApplicantsThere are three types of applicant. The person to be protected, someone on their behalf and a relevant third party.If you are the person to be protected and are applying yourself for an order, with or without legal representation, you are also the applicant. Fill in section 1 only, and then go to section 4.A relevant third party applicant is a person or organisation that is allowed to make anapplication on behalf of another without the leave of the court. Only the Lord Chancellor can make a person or organisation a relevant third party, for example a local authority.If you are not a relevant third party and you are not the person who is to be protected by the order you can still make the application, but you need the court’s permission. The court can give you the form (FGM006) to apply for permission.Form FGM001 still needs to be completed when using the form FGM006.Address detailsIf you do not wish your address, or the address of any person named in the application form to be made known to the respondent, leave the space(s) on the form blank and complete Confidential contact details Form C8. The court can give you this form.Section 2 – Person to be protectedThis section only needs to be completed if you are applying on behalf of someone. If you are the person to be protected by the order, leave this section blank.Address detailsIf you do not wish the address of the person to be protected to be made known to the respondent, leave the space blank and complete Confidential contact details Form C8. The court can give you this form.
Section 4 – RespondentsA person who you want the court to make an order against is called the respondent. There may be more than one respondent.If you know of other people who may become involved as a respondent include their details in section 6.Section 5 – The OrderA FGM Protection Order provides protection to victims of or potential victims of FGM. Each FGM Protection Order is specific to each case and contains terms that change the behaviour of the respondent and other people.Examples of what you might want the court to order are:ï that the respondent does not take you or the person to be protected abroad with the purpose of committing or attempting to commit FGMï that the respondent does not enter into any arrangements in the UK or abroad for FGM to be performed on you or the person to be protectedï that the respondent surrenders their passport or any other travel documents and/ or the passport of the person named in the application.In section 5 or in a separate statement say why you are applying and give full details.Urgent ordersAn urgent order made by the court before the notice of the application is served on the respondent is called a without notice order. Indeciding whether to make a without notice order the court will consider all the circumstances of the case, including:ï any risk of a FGM procedure being carried out on the person to be protected or another person, if the order is not made immediatelyï 
ï whether it is likely that the applicant will be deterred or prevented from pursuing the application if an order is not made immediatelyï whether there is reason to believe that the respondent is aware of the proceedings but is deliberately evading service and the person to be protected or the applicant will be seriously prejudiced by the delay.If you are applying for a ‘without notice’ order you must include the reasons why the court should deal with the application without notifying the respondent first. You must provide a witness statement verified by a statement of truth.The court can tell you how to do this.If the court makes a ‘without notice’ order, it must give the respondent or other person anopportunity take representations about the order as soon as just and convenient at a full hearing.Further detailsFurther information on making an application is contained in the leaflet FGM700 Female Genital Mutilation Protection Orders. The leaflet contains information on coming to court, and what happens if a respondent or other person fails to obey a court order. You can download this leaflet and details of your local court from our website http://hmctsformfinder.justice.gov.uk
Mandatory Reporting of Female Genital Mutilation – procedural information
1. IntroductionBackgroundFemale Genital Mutilation (FGM) is illegal in England and Wales under the FGM Act 2003 (“the 2003 Act”). It is a form of child abuse and violence against women. FGM comprises all procedures involving partial or total removal of the external female genitalia for non-medical reasons.Section 5B of the 2003 Act1 introduces a mandatory reporting duty which requires regulated health and social care professionals and teachers in England and Wales to report ‘known’ cases of FGM in under 18s which they identify in the course of their professional work to the police.The duty came into force on 31 October 2015.‘Known’ cases are those where either a girl informs the person that an act of FGM – however described – has been carried out on her, or where the person observes physical signs on a girl appearing to show that an act of FGM has been carried out and the person has no reason to believe that the act was, or was part of, a surgical operation within section 1(2)(a) or (b) of the FGM Act 20032.Purpose and audienceThe duty applies to all regulated professionals (as defined in section 5B(2)(a), (11) and (12) of the 2003 Act) working within health or social care, and teachers. It therefore covers:ï Health and social care professionals regulated by a body which is overseen by the Professional Standards Authority for Health and Social Care (with the exception of the Pharmaceutical Society of Northern Ireland). This includes those regulated by the:o General Chiropractic Councilo General Dental Councilo General Medical Councilo General Optical Councilo General Osteopathic Councilo General Pharmaceutical Councilo Health and Care Professions Council (whose role includes the regulation of social workers in England)o Nursing and Midwifery Councilï teachers3 - this includes qualified teachers or persons who are employed or engaged to carry out teaching work in schools and other institutions, and, in Wales, education practitioners regulated by the Education Workforce Council;ï social care workers in Wales4.1 As inserted by section 74 of the Serious Crime Act 20152 For more information, see sections 2.1a and 2.1b.3 Section 5B(11) of the FGM Act 2003 (as inserted by section 74 of the Serious Crime Act 2015) provides the definition for the term ‘teacher’: “”teacher” means – (a) in relation to England, a person within section 141A(1) of the Education Act 2002 (persons employed or engaged to carry out teaching work at schools and other institutions in England); (b) in relation to Wales, a person who falls within a category listed in the table in paragraph 1 of Schedule 2 to the Education (Wales) Act 2014 (anaw 5) (categories of registration for purposes of Part 2 of that Act) or any other person employed or engaged as a teacher at a school (within the meaning of the Education Act 1996) in Wales”.
The purpose of this document is to give professionals subject to the duty and their employers an understanding of the legal requirements it places on them, a suggested process to follow, and an overview of the action which may be taken if they fail to comply with the duty. It also aims to give the police an understanding of the duty and the next steps upon receiving a report.In addition to complying with the duty, professionals should continue to have regard to their wider safeguarding responsibilities, which require consideration and action to be taken whenever there is any identified or known risk to a child, whether in relation to FGM or another matter. The process map at annex A shows where the duty fits within existing child safeguarding responsibilities.A detailed Q and A is available at annex B.This document should be considered in conjunction with relevant guidance on FGM and safeguarding, including Working Together to Safeguard Children (in England) or Working Together to Safeguard People (in Wales) as appropriate, and the multi-agency statutory guidance on FGM.While the duty is limited to the specified professionals described above, non-regulated practitioners also have a responsibility to take appropriate safeguarding action in relation to any identified or suspected case of FGM, in line with wider safeguarding frameworks. More information is available in Working Together to Safeguard Children (in England) or Working Together to Safeguard People (in Wales) as appropriate.The duty applies in England and Wales only.4 Section 5B(11) of the Female Genital Mutilation Act 2003 defines a “social care worker” as a person registered in a register maintained by the Care Council for Wales under section 56 of the Care Standards Act 2000.
2. Making a report2.1 When a report must be madeThe FGM mandatory reporting duty is a legal duty provided for in the FGM Act 2003 (as amended by the Serious Crime Act 2015). The legislation requires regulated health and social care professionals and teachers in England and Wales to make a report to the police where, in the course of their professional duties, they either:ï are informed by a girl under 18 that an act of FGM has been carried out on her; orï observe physical signs which appear to show that an act of FGM has been carried out on a girl under 18 and they have no reason to believe that the act was necessary for the girl’s physical or mental health or for purposes connected with labour or birth (see section 2.1a for further information).For the purposes of the duty, the relevant age is the girl’s age at the time of the disclosure/identification of FGM (i.e. it does not apply where a woman aged 18 or over discloses she had FGM when she was under 18).Complying with the duty does not breach any confidentiality requirement or other restriction on disclosure which might otherwise apply.The duty is a personal duty which requires the individual professional who becomes aware of the case to make a report; the responsibility cannot be transferred. The only exception to this is if you know that another individual from your profession has already made a report; there is no requirement to make a second.The duty does not apply in relation to at risk or suspected cases or in cases where the woman is over 18. In these cases, you should follow local safeguarding procedures. For more information, please see Working Together to Safeguard Children (in England) or Working Together to Safeguard People (in Wales) as appropriate, and/or the multi-agency statutory guidance on FGM.Where there is a risk to life or likelihood of serious immediate harm, professionals should report the case immediately to police, including dialling 999 if appropriate.
2.1 a Visually identified cases – when you might see FGMThe duty applies to cases you discover in the course of your professional work.If you do not currently undertake genital examinations in the course of delivering your job, then the duty does not change this. Most professionals will only visually identify FGM as a secondary result of undertaking another action.For healthcare professionals, if, in the course of your work, you see physical signs which you think appear to show that a child has had FGM, this is the point at which the duty applies – the duty does not require there to be a full clinical diagnosis confirming FGM before a report is made, and one should not be carried out unless you identify the case as part of an examination already under way and are able to ascertain this as part of that. Unless you are already delivering care which includes a genital examination, you should not carry one out5.For teachers and social workers, there are no circumstances in which you should be examining a girl. It is possible that a teacher, perhaps assisting a young child in the toilet or changing a nappy, may see something which appears to show that FGM may have taken place. In such circumstances, the teacher must make a report under the duty, but should not conduct any further examination of the child.2.1 b Verbally disclosed casesIf you are a relevant professional and a girl discloses to you that she has had FGM (whether she uses the term ‘female genital mutilation’ or any other term or description, e.g. ‘cut’) then the duty applies. If, in the course of delivering safe and appropriate care to a girl you would usually ask if she has had FGM, you should continue to do so.The duty applies to cases directly disclosed by the victim; if a parent, guardian, sibling or other individual discloses that a girl under 18 has had FGM, the duty does not apply and a report to the police is not mandatory. Any such disclosure should, however, be handled in line with wider safeguarding responsibilities - in England, this is likely to include referral to children’s social services, and in Wales the disclosure must be immediately referred to the local authority.Further information, including advice and support on how to talk to girls and parents/guardians about FGM, is available in the multi-agency statutory guidance on FGM.5 More information is available in the General Medical Council’s guidance on intimate examinations and the child protection examinations section of their guidance on protecting children and young people
2.2 Timeframe for reportsReports under the duty should be made as soon as possible after a case is discovered, and best practice is for reports to be made by the close of the next working day, unless any of the factors described below are present. You should act with at least the same urgency as is required by your local safeguarding processes.In order to allow for exceptional cases, a maximum timeframe of one month from when the discovery is made6 applies for making reports. However, the expectation is that reports will be made much sooner than this.A longer timeframe than the next working day may be appropriate in exceptional cases where, for example, a professional has concerns that a report to the police is likely to result in an immediate safeguarding risk to the child (or another child, e.g. a sibling) and considers that consultation with colleagues or other agencies is necessary prior to the report being made. If you think you are dealing with such a case, you are strongly advised to consult colleagues, including your designated safeguarding lead, as soon as practicable, and to keep a record of any decisions made. It is important to remember that the safety of the girl is the priority.2.3 Making a reportWhere you become aware of a case, the legislation requires you to make a report to the police force area within which the girl resides. The legislation allows for reports to be made orally or in writing.When you make a report to the police, the legislation requires you to identify the girl and explain why the report is being made. While the requirement to notify the police of this information is mandatory and overrides any restriction on disclosure which might otherwise apply, in handling and sharing information in all other contexts you should continue to have regard to relevant legislation and guidance, including the Data Protection Act 1998 and any guidance for your profession. The provisions of the Data Protection Act 1998 do not prevent a mandatory report to the police from being made.While the legislation requires a report to be made to the police, it does not specify the process for making the report. If you have a formal agreement with the relevant team in the police that reports can be made to them directly, then reports may be made this way. In all cases you should ensure that you are given a reference number for the case and that you keep a record of it.2.3a Making a reportIt is recommended that you make a report orally by calling 101, the single non-emergency number.When you call 101, the system will determine your location and connect you to the police force covering that area. You will hear a recorded message announcing the police force you are being connected to. You will then be given a choice of which force to be connected to – if you are calling with a report relating to an area outside the force area which you are calling from, you can ask to be directed to that force.6 As required by section 5B (5)(c) of the 2003 Act (as amended by the Serious Crime Act 2015)
Calls to 101 are answered by trained police officers and staff in the control room of the local police force. The call handler will log the call and refer it to the relevant team within the force, who will call you back to ask for additional information and discuss the case in more detail.You should be prepared to provide the call handler with the following information:ï explain that you are making a report under the FGM mandatory reporting dutyï your details:o nameo contact details (work telephone number and e-mail address) and times when you will be available to be called backo roleo place of workï details of your organisation’s designated safeguarding lead:o nameo contact details (work telephone number and e-mail address)o place of workï the girl’s details:o nameo age/date of birtho addressï if applicable, confirm that you have undertaken, or will undertake, safeguarding actions, as required by the Working Together to Safeguard Children (in England) or Working Together to Safeguard People (in Wales) as appropriate.You will be given a reference number for the call and should ensure that you document this in your records (see section 2.3b).2.3b Record keepingThroughout the process, you should ensure that you keep a comprehensive record of any discussions held and subsequent decisions made, in line with standard safeguarding practice. This will include the circumstances surrounding the initial identification or disclosure of FGM, details of any safeguarding actions which were taken, and when and how you reported the case to the police (including the case reference number). You should also ensure that your organisation’s designated safeguarding lead is kept updated as appropriate.
2.3 c Informing the child’s familyIn line with safeguarding best practice, you should contact the girl and/or her parents or guardians as appropriate to explain the report, why it is being made, and what it means. Wherever possible, you should have this discussion in advance of/in parallel to the report being made. Advice and support on how to talk to girls and parents/guardians about FGM is available in the multi-agency statutory guidance on FGM.However, if you believe that telling the child/parents about the report may result in a risk of serious harm to the child or anyone else, or of the family fleeing the country, you should not discuss it. For more information, please see information sharing advice for safeguarding practitioners. If you are unsure or have concerns, you should discuss these with your designated safeguarding lead.2.4 Your responsibilities after you have made a reportIn relation to any next steps, you should continue to have regard to your wider safeguarding and professional responsibilities, including any relevant standards issued by your regulatory body.For example, in a health context, your responsibilities include responding to the physical and psychological needs of the girl.Depending on your role and the specific circumstances of the case, you may be required to contribute to the multi-agency response or other follow up to the case which will follow your report (see Section 3). If you are unsure, you should seek advice from your designated safeguarding lead.
2.5 Safeguarding duty in WalesProfessionals working within Wales should be aware that section 130 of the Social Services and Well-being (Wales) Act 2014 also applies to cases covered by the FGM mandatory reporting duty. The all-Wales child protection procedures, adopted by all safeguarding boards in Wales, provide a consistent framework for referral, consideration, and determining action by all safeguarding partners in Wales, including a dedicated protocol on FGM.Section 130 came into force in April 2016. It requires “relevant partners”7 of the local authority to inform the local authority where they have reasonable cause to suspect that a child within the local authority’s area is a child at risk (i.e. is experiencing or is at risk of abuse, neglect or other kinds of harm, and has needs for care and support). To comply with both duties, professionals in Wales who identify cases falling within the FGM mandatory reporting duty need to make a report to both the police and the local authority.7 Section 162(4) of the Social Services and Well-being (Wales) Act 2014 defines relevant partners as follows:“(a)	the local policing body and the chief officer of police for a police area any part of which falls within the area of the local authority;(b) any other local authority with which the authority agrees that it would be appropriate to co-operate under this section;(c) the Secretary of State to the extent that the Secretary of State is discharging functions under sections 2 and 3 of the Offender Management Act 2007 in relation to Wales;(d) any provider of probation services that is required by arrangements under section 3(2) of the Offender Management Act 2007 to act as a relevant partner of the authority;(e) a Local Health Board for an area any part of which falls within the area of the authority;(f) an NHS trust providing services in the area of the authority;(g) the Welsh Ministers to the extent that they are discharging functions under Part 2 of the Learning and Skills Act 2000;(h) such a person, or a person of such description, as regulations may specify.”(b) 
3. Next steps following a reportUpon receipt of a report, the police will record the information and initiate the multi-agency response, in line with local safeguarding arrangements. Exact procedures will vary across local areas. If the police consider that emergency action is needed to protect the child, they may take action in advance of the multi-agency response.While the multi-agency response will be initiated by the police, as they are the agency receiving the report, they will consult children’s social care prior to taking action.Factors considered may include:ï measures necessary to protect the girl/others identified as being at risk of harm (children’s social care lead);ï possible criminal investigation (police lead); andï the health and wellbeing requirements of the girl/others, including how the care will be delivered (health lead).The protection of the child must be paramount at all times. The multi-agency response should consider any wider health or emotional support that the child may need. In considering the case and next steps, local safeguarding processes should continue to be followed, in line with wider relevant guidance, including: Working Together to Safeguard Children (in England) or Working Together to Safeguard People (in Wales) as appropriate, the multi-agency statutory guidance on FGM, information sharing, and, for the police, the authorised professional practice on FGM.The police will provide you with feedback on the outcome of the case, including an update on any safeguarding action taken.3.1  FGM Protection OrdersDepending on the circumstances of the case, the police or local authority may wish to consider applying for an FGM Protection Order (FGMPO) either to protect the girl or to protect other girls who may be at risk (e.g. siblings). An FGMPO is a civil order which may be made for the purposes of protecting a girl at risk of FGM or protecting a girl against whom an FGM offence has been committed.
4. Failure to comply with the dutyCases of failure to comply with the duty will be dealt with in accordance with the existing performance procedures in place for each profession. FGM is child abuse, and employers and the professional regulators are expected to pay due regard to the seriousness of breaches of the duty.4.1  Health and social care professionalsFor health and social care professionals, failure to comply with the duty may be considered through fitness to practise proceedings by the regulator with whom the professional is registered.Regulators will use their frameworks to consider a professional’s ability currently to practise safely. This will therefore take all aspects of the circumstances of the case into consideration, including the safety of the individual child and her immediate needs. This may result in a wide variety of recommendations as to suitable action (e.g. re-training or supervision). Regulators may wish to issue guidance to their registrants as to how to act and when action may be taken.4.2  TeachersFor teachers, schools will need to consider any failure to comply with the duty in accordance with their staff disciplinary procedures. Where the school determines it is appropriate to dismiss the teacher as a result of the failure to comply, or the teacher would have been dismissed had they not resigned, the school must consider whether to refer the matter to the National College of Teaching and Leadership (NCTL) in England or the Education Workforce Council (EWC) in Wales, as regulators of the teaching profession.For teachers in England, the NCTL will consider referrals to determine whether the facts presented in respect of the individual’s failure to comply with the duty are proven and whether they amount to unacceptable professional conduct or conduct likely to bring the profession into disrepute. If proven, the NCTL will consider whether it is appropriate to make a prohibition order which prevents the individual from carrying out teaching work in any school, children’s home, sixth form college, and relevant youth accommodation in England.For teachers in Wales, in considering cases the EWC will look at the individual’s conduct and consider whether their failure to comply with the duty was so serious that it should affect their registration, which may include initiating fitness to practise proceedings.
Annex A – FGM mandatory reporting process mapThis process map is intended to demonstrate where the FGM mandatory reporting duty fits within existing processes. It is not intended to be an exhaustive guide, and should be considered in the context of wider safeguarding guidance and processes.
Professionals should:- record all decisions- communicate sensitively with the girl/family
Relevant professional concerned that an under 18 has had/is at risk of FGM.

Informed by the girl that she has had FGM
Observes physical signs which appear to show FGM has been carried out
Suspects FGM has been carried out
Considers girl may be at risk of FGM

In Wales: supplemented by duty to report
Mandatory reporting duty applies	Follow local safeguarding procedures(mandatory reporting duty does not apply)
Response initiated by police, in consultation	Response initiated by local authority with local authority children’s social care		children’s social careASSESSMENT OF CASE: Multi-agency safeguarding meeting convened in line with local safeguarding arrangements.
Police and social caretake immediate action as appropriate
Attendees include:- police- children’s social care- health
Police provide feedback on cases reported under mandatory reporting duty.
followed by
Factors considered may include:- measures to protect the girl/others identified as being at risk (children’s social care lead)- possible criminal investigation (police lead)- health and wellbeing requirements of the girl/ others, including how care delivered (health lead)- 
Annex B – Q and AWho the duty applies toHow do I know if the duty applies to me?The duty applies to all regulated health and social care professionals and teachers in England and Wales. This covers:ï Health and social care professionals registered with any of the regulatory bodies within the remit of the Professional Standards Authority for Health and Social Care, with the exception of the Pharmaceutical Society of Northern Ireland (full list at section one);ï Teachers in England and Wales. This includes qualified teachers or persons who are employed or engaged to carry out teaching work in schools and other institutions, and, in Wales, education practitioners regulated by the Education Workforce Council; andï Social care workers in Wales (i.e. those registered with the Care Council for Wales)8.If you are still unsure whether the duty applies to you, check with your designated safeguarding lead.Does the duty apply to professionals working in private education/healthcare?The duty applies to all regulated health and social care professionals and teachers in England and Wales, including those working in private education and healthcare.Where regulated professionals/teachers working in private education or healthcare identify a case of FGM which falls within the mandatory reporting duty, they are required to make a report to the police, provided the case was discovered in the course of their professional duties.I am a relevant professional working in Scotland/Northern Ireland – do I have to comply with this duty?No. The FGM mandatory reporting duty applies in England and Wales only. If you are a teacher or regulated health or social care professional working in Scotland or Northern Ireland, the duty does not apply – you should continue to comply with your existing safeguarding responsibilities.8 S5B(11) of the Female Genital Mutilation Act 2003 defines a “social care worker” as a person registered in a register maintained by the Care Council for Wales under section 56 of the Care Standards Act 2000.
Education professionalsWhich teachers are within scope of the duty?In England, the scope of the duty is in line with the regulatory coverage of the National College for Teaching and Leadership (NCTL).The duty applies to any teacher who is employed or engaged to carry out ‘teaching work’, whether or not they have qualified teacher status, in maintained schools, academies, free schools, independent schools, non-maintained special schools, sixth form colleges, 16-19 academies, relevant youth accommodation or children’s homes in England.‘Teaching work’ is defined as being each of the following activities: planning and preparing lessons and courses for pupils; delivering lessons to pupils; assessing and/or reporting on the development, progress and attainment of pupils.The above would include a teacher carrying out one or more of the above activities as part of their Qualified Teacher Status induction period - this would include those in their second year of Teach First, but not trainee teachers in other circumstances, nor teaching/classroom assistants.In Wales, the scope of the duty is in line with the regulatory coverage of the Education Workforce Council (EWC), which regulates education practitioners in Wales. This covers: teachers in maintained schools, Further Education (FE) teachers, and learning support staff in both school and FE settings.I am employed as a teacher but do not have Qualified Teacher Status. Does the duty apply to me?Yes. The duty applies to anyone employed or engaged to carry out teaching work in specified settings, whether or not they have Qualified Teacher Status (see question above for details of the relevant settings).I work as a teacher in a Further Education (FE) college. Does the duty apply to me?In Wales, the duty applies to teachers and learning support staff in FE colleges.If you are a teacher in a FE college in England, the duty does not apply. You should, however, follow local safeguarding procedures when you know or have reason to suspect that a girl has undergone FGM, or is at risk of FGM.When the duty appliesI have identified a girl under 18 who I suspect may have undergone FGM, does the duty apply?The duty does not apply in relation to suspected cases - it is limited to ‘known’ cases (i.e. those which are visually identified or disclosed to a professional by the victim – see section 2.1 for more information). In these cases, you should follow local safeguarding procedures. If you are concerned that there is an immediate threat you should take immediate action in line with local safeguarding procedures.For more information, please see Working Together to Safeguard Children (in England) or Working Together to Safeguard People (in Wales) as appropriate, and the multi-agency statutory guidance on FGM.
I have identified a girl under 18 who I think may be at risk of FGM, does the duty apply?The duty does not apply in relation to at risk cases - it is limited to ‘known’ cases (i.e. those which are visually identified or disclosed to a professional by the victim – see section 2.1 for more information). If you are concerned that a girl may be at risk of FGM, you should follow local safeguarding procedures.Where there is a risk to life or likelihood of serious immediate harm, professionals should report the case immediately to police, including dialling 999 if appropriate.For more information, on handling at risk cases, please see Working Together to Safeguard Children (in England) or Working Together to Safeguard People (in Wales) as appropriate, and the multi-agency statutory guidance on FGM.I don’t know much about FGM, what should I do to make sure I comply with the duty?A range of information and guidance on FGM is available for all professionals, including a free FGM e-learning package.For healthcare professionals, Health Education England provide a free 10-15 minute FGM introductory session which gives an overview of what FGM is and the issues related to it.In Wales, each health board has an FGM Lead and any queries should be referred to them. The Welsh Government’s National Training Framework on violence against women, domestic violence and sexual abuse will introduce a standard of training for these issues, related to job role, across the Welsh public service. The National Training Framework includes both basic, and fundamental levels of training and a specialist subject syllabus, each of which will include FGM.Detailed guidance on FGM for professionals and organisations is available in the multi-agency statutory guidance on FGM.Do I only have to make a report if I am 100% certain that FGM has been carried out?No. The duty is limited to ‘known’ cases (i.e. those which are visually identified or disclosed to a professional by the victim – see section 2.1 for more information), but this does not mean that you must be 100% certain that FGM has been carried out or that a clinical diagnosis must have taken place prior to a report being made.You are not required to ‘verify’ that FGM has occurred in order for the duty to apply and a report to be made. Whether the girl needs to be referred for a diagnosis will be considered as part of the subsequent multi-agency response.
The duty applies to my profession and I do volunteer work with children. When volunteering, a girl has disclosed that she has had FGM. Am I required to report under the duty?The duty only applies to cases discovered by a relevant professional in the course of the professional work. It therefore does not apply to cases a relevant professional discovers outside of their professional work, and this includes volunteer work.If you discover a case in your capacity as a volunteer, you should ensure that you follow appropriate safeguarding procedures (in line with the organisation’s processes) and any wider safeguarding responsibilities which apply to your profession.I have identified a case but the victim is over 18, what should I do?The duty does not apply in cases where the woman is over 18 at the time of the disclosure/discovery of FGM (even if she was under 18 when the FGM was carried out).Whatever an individual’s circumstances, they have rights which should always be respected, such as the right to personal safety and to be given accurate information about their rights and choices. Professionals should listen to the victim and respect their wishes whenever possible. However, there may be times when a victim wants to take a course of action that may put them at risk – in these circumstances, professionals should explain the potential outcomes and risks to the victim and take the necessary adult protection precautions, including signposting her to health services which will be able to consider any additional support needed.Professionals should also be clear that FGM is a criminal offence in the UK and must not be permitted or condoned. They should consider whether there are others in the family who may be at risk.Further guidance on handling adult cases is available in the multi-agency statutory guidance on FGM.I have become aware that FGM has been carried out on a girl under 18, but I know that another person in my profession has already referred this case to the police. Am I required to make another report to the police?If you are aware that a report to the police in connection with the same act of FGM has already been made by someone from your profession, the duty does not apply (i.e. you are not required to make a second report)9. If, however, you are unsure, or if the person making the report does not belong to a profession captured by the duty, you should report the case to the police, and highlight that a report may have been made previously.A parent has told me their daughter has had FGM, but I cannot ask the girl as I do not have contact or a relationship with her. What do I do?If a parent, guardian, sibling or other individual discloses that a girl under 18 has had FGM, you should follow local safeguarding procedures, which may include a referral to children’s social services. In some circumstances this will also involve informing the police.For further information, including advice and support about how to talk to girls and parents/guardians about FGM, see the multi-agency statutory guidance on FGM.9 For these purposes, professionals regulated by a body which belongs to the Professional Standards Authority for Health and Social Care are considered as belonging to the same profession.
I have identified a girl under 18 who has had a genital piercing/genital tattoo/female genital cosmetic surgery. What should I do?You should make a report. Further information on genital piercings and female genital cosmetic surgery and the law in England and Wales is available in the multi-agency statutory guidance on FGM. For the purpose of the duty, you are not required to be satisfied that a criminal offence has been committed.Visually identified casesI don’t know what FGM looks like – what should I do if I think I have seen it?The duty is limited to ‘known’ cases (i.e. those which are visually identified or disclosed to a professional by the victim), but this does not mean that you must be 100% certain that FGM has been carried out or that a clinical diagnosis must have taken place prior to a report being made.If, in the course of your work, you see physical signs which you think appear to show that a girl under 18 has had FGM, this is the point at which the duty applies and at which you are required to make a report. The duty does not require there to be a full clinical diagnosis confirming FGM before a report is made, and one should not be carried out unless you identified the case as part of an examination already under way and are able to ascertain this as part of that.I am a clinician and I am concerned as I know that some types of FGM (e.g. type 4) are very difficult to notice unless you are undertaking an examination with the specific purpose of looking for the signs. What if I have carried out a procedure on a patient (e.g. inserting a catheter) and at a later date that patient is identified as having had FGM?If an allegation of failure to report is made, in considering whether a person has genuinely failed to notice the signs of FGM, all of the relevant circumstances will be taken into account by the regulators, including your experience and what could reasonably have been expected. All relevant information will be taken into account, including the fact that experts in the field can find it difficult to see indications of FGM having taken place in some circumstances.Making reportsHow do I make a report?Information on making reports is outlined in section 2.3.I am concerned that if I inform the family before making the report the family may disappear or coerce the girl into changing her account, what should I do?Please see section 2.3c. If you are still unsure or have concerns, you should discuss these with your designated safeguarding lead.Do I have to inform the girl’s family before making a report?In line with safeguarding best practice, you should explain the report, why it is being made, and what it means with the girl and/or her parents or guardians as appropriate. See section 2.3c for more information.
I have made a report under the duty, but my local process is to make a full referral to social services. Why do I have to report twice?The legislation requires you to make a report to the police and does not require a second report to social services. Local areas may wish to update their procedures to reflect that a report made under the mandatory reporting duty is sufficient and duplicate reporting is not required, but that is a matter for local decision.Professionals working within Wales should be aware that section 130 of the Social Services and Well-being (Wales) Act 2014 also applies to cases covered by the FGM mandatory reporting duty.I have concerns about making a report via 101 – is this process secure?Yes. Calls to 101 are answered by trained police officers and staff in the control room of the local police force. Police forces have responsibilities regarding the management of information, including a statutory responsibility to comply with the Data Protection Act 1998.I am an expert practitioner in this field and we already have reporting processes directly to the police, through local arrangements with the specialist unit in the force who deal with these cases. Do I have to call 101?No. The legislation requires a report to be made to the police, but it does not mandate the process for making the report. If you have a formal agreement with the relevant team in the police that reports can be made to them directly, then reports may be made this way. In all cases you should ensure that you are given a reference number for the case and keep a record of this.The 101 process is recommended as a simple and clear reporting route for professionals who need to make a report under the duty and who do not routinely have contact with the relevant team within the police.I have a duty of confidence to my patients, doesn’t requiring a report to the police breach this?No. Complying with the duty does not breach any confidentiality requirement or other restriction on disclosure which might otherwise apply, including any legal requirements. If you are a relevant professional and you become aware of a case where the duty applies, the legislation requires you to make a report to the police.I work in a clinic where patients do not have to provide their personal details. I have identified a case where the duty applies, but I suspect that the details I have for the girl are not accurate. What should I do?If you would not previously have taken any additional action to obtain accurate details, that should not change. You should make the report according to the available information and let the police know that you are not sure whether all of the information that you have is accurate.I have identified a case where the duty applies, and it is not clear from the girl’s records whether a report has already been made - what should I do?If the girl’s records are unclear, you should report the case to the police in accordance with the duty and highlight that you believe a report may have been made previously.
What should I do if I have come under the duty to report and I think another professional working in my organisation should have made a report previously, but I cannot see any evidence that they ever did anything?You should report the case to the police in accordance with the duty and highlight that you believe a report may have been made previously. As failure to comply with the duty represents a failure of the individual to comply with their professional duties, you may also wish to consider whether to highlight this to the relevant safeguarding lead in your organisation.What should I do if the girl’s family assure me that the case has been reported to the police under the duty, but I cannot see any evidence of this?If there is no evidence to support this, or if the report was made by a professional belonging to a different profession, you should report the case to the police, and highlight that the family have indicated a report may have been made previously.You can reassure the family that if a report has already been made and an appropriate response put in place, then this will be identified by the police early on in the process.I know about the duty, and as a result, I want to avoid discussing FGM in the course of my work so that I don’t have to deal with what is said. Is that ok?No. All professionals subject to this duty have wider professional and safeguarding responsibilities. If a professional deliberately avoids this issue and alters the care or support which they would otherwise give to the girl, this would conflict with their wider responsibilities and follow up action may be taken.Cases identified before 31 October 2015I became aware before the duty came into effect (31 October 2015) that a girl under 18 had FGM carried out, am I required to report this?The mandatory reporting duty applies from 31 October 2015 onwards, and therefore does not apply to cases discovered before this.However, as a crime may have been committed, if you have concerns about a case prior to this date, you should consult your designated safeguarding lead to consider whether a report to the police may be appropriate.After making the reportI made a report - will I be informed of the outcome and of any safeguarding action being taken?The police will provide you with feedback on the outcome of the case and about any follow-up action being taken. See section 3 for more information.
What if the investigation identifies that there are no physical signs of the abuse, but the child gives an account of having undergone FGM?If a girl under 18 tells you, as part of a conversation you have initiated or otherwise, that she has had FGM, then you should treat this as a disclosure and make a report under the duty and take appropriate action in line with your local safeguarding processes.If you make a report as a result of such a disclosure and there is later found to be no physical evidence of FGM, you will not be penalised for making the report.The girl’s family are scared and worried about the follow-up. What can I do to help reassure them and explain what they can expect?For further information, including advice and support about how to talk to girls and parents/guardians about FGM, see the multi-agency statutory guidance on FGM. You may also wish to seek advice from your manager or designated safeguarding lead.A fact sheet for communities which explains the duty, including what happens after a case is reported to the police, is available in 11 languages.What if there is a breakdown in trust as a result of my having made a report to the police?The FGM mandatory reporting duty is a legal duty provided for in the FGM Act 2003 (as amended by the Serious Crime Act 2015). If the duty applies to you and you identify a relevant case, you are legally required to make a report to the police.There may be situations where this is difficult, but you are advised to be open and honest, in line with best practice on information sharing and safeguarding.For further information, including advice and support about how to talk to girls and parents/guardians about FGM, see the multi-agency guidance on FGM. You may also wish to seek advice from your manager or designated safeguarding lead.What if I am organising the multi-agency response, but I cannot get involvement or engagement from one of the other sectors?Your response should be in line with wider safeguarding procedures – for more information, please see Working Together to Safeguard Children (in England) or Working Together to Safeguard People (in Wales) as appropriate.
Home  Benefits  Benefits and financial support if you're disabled or have a health conditionFinancial help if you're disabled
OverviewThere is a wide range of disability-related financial support, including benefits, tax credits, payments, grants and concessions.Some benefits you might get are:Universal CreditPersonal Independence Payment (PIP) or Disability Living Allowance (DLA) Attendance Allowance New Style Employment and Support Allowance (ESA) Depending on your circumstances, you might also be able to get:Industrial Injuries Benefit if you’re disabled as a result of workConstant Attendance Allowance if you need daily care and attention because of a disabilityThis guide is also available in Welsh (Cymraeg).Vehicles and transportIf you’re disabled you can apply for the following:exemption from paying vehicle tax parking benefits - Blue Badgedisabled persons bus pass or Disabled Persons Railcard help to buy or lease a car from the Motability SchemeHome and housingIf you’ve been assessed by your local council as needing care and support services, you can get:Direct payments - allowing you to buy in and arrange help yourself instead of getting it directly from social servicesDisabled Facilities Grants - which is money towards the costs of home adaptations to enable you to continue living thereIf you’re on a low incomeYou may be eligible for Universal Credit and could g et help with housing costs.If not, check if you’re eligible for Housing Benefit and Council Tax Reduction from your local council.Help if you’re employedYou may be able to top up a low salary by claiming Universal Credit. You also might be able to get an Access to Work grant to pay for:special equipment, adaptations or support worker services to help you do things like answer the phone or go to meetingshelp getting to and from work mental health supportcommunication support at a job interview (for example, a British Sign Language interpreter or a lipspeaker)VAT relief on certain goods and servicesYou do not have to pay VAT on certain goods and services if they’re just for your own use and you’re disabled or have a long term illness.Armed forces compensationYou may be able to g et compensation if you’ve been injured or disabled while serving in the armed forces.
Related contentApply for a Council Tax discountApply for equipment for your home if you're disabledBenefits calculators Disability day care centresGet meals at home (meals on wheels) Show 4 more
 NextDisability and sickness benefitsView a printable version of the whole guideExplore the topicBenefits and financial support if you're disabled or have a health condition Benefits and financial helpCaring for someone Armed forcesServices and informationGovernment activityBenefitsEducation and learningDepartmentsBirths, death, marriages and careEmploying peopleNewsBusiness and self-employedEnvironment and countrysideGuidance and regulationChildcare and parentingHousing and local servicesResearch and statisticsCitizenship and living in the UKMoney and taxPolicy papers and consultationsCrime, justice and the lawPassports, travel and living abroadTransparencyDisabled peopleVisas and immigrationHow government worksDriving and transportWorking , jobs and pensionsGet involved
Home  Crime, justice and law  Crime preventionGuidanceFirearms licensingLicensing guidance, good practice on firearms law, and forms for applying for approvals under the law.From: Home O?cePublished 19 December 2012Last updated 2 May 2024 — See all updatesRelated contentFirearms security handbook 2020 Firearms licensing lawFirearms application formsCollection Operational policing FirearmsThe possession of firearms and ammunition in Great Britain is regulated mainly by the Firearms Act 1968.GuidanceYou should read the Home O?ce guide on firearms licensing law alongside the statutory g uidance for chief o?cers of police.The firearms security handbook provides guidance for police and others on securely storing and moving guns.The 2023 leaflet air weapons: a brief guide to safety contains information on the safe handling and storage of air weapons, the di?erent types of air weapons and air weapons and the law.The specifications for adapting shotgun magazines were revised in 2010.Apply for a shotgun or firearms certificateYou need a firearms certificate issued by the police to possess, buy or acquire a firearm or shotgun. You must also have a certificate to buy ammunition.Apply for a shotgun or firearms certificate from your local police force.Before applying for a certificate, please refer to our g uide on firearms licensing law which contains information about the possession of firearms by persons previously convicted of crime (section 21 of the Firearms Act 1968).You can find information about the fees charged for firearms applications on police websites and in our g uide on firearms licensing law.You should raise any enquiries or complaints about an application directly with the relevant local police force.Apply for a Home O?ce firearms licenceYou can apply for or manage a: prohibited weapons and ammunition (section 5) authority  shooting club approval museum licenceYou can find information about the relevant fee in circular 006/2019: Firearms (Fees) Regulations 2019. See also chapter 19 in our g uide onfirearms licensing law.Deactivated firearmsThis section sets out the law on deactivated firearms and information on the current deactivation standards. It also includes details of earlier deactivation standards that may still apply in some cases.Technical specificationsNew technical specifications for deactivated weapons came into force on 8 April 2016. The aim was to set common standards which would render deactivated weapons irreversibly inoperable. The current deactivation standards reflect the revised standards that came into force from 28 June 2018 following a review of the Implementing regulation - 2015/2403 specifications.Firearms that fall outside the scope of Implementing Regulation 2018/337 should be deactivated to the requirements of the 2010 Specification - Adapting shotgun magazines and deactivating firearms. Such firearms include, but are not limited to, flare pistols, launchers, mortars and artillery pieces.Deactivation certificates issued by the Proof Authority before the Regulations came into force are still valid. It is only when the owner of a previously deactivated firearm seeks to transfer it, or to o?er to sell or gift the weapon, or sells or gifts the weapon, they will need to comply with the new standards.Deactivated firearms that fall outside the scope of Implementing Regulation 2018/337 can still be transferred without the need for them to comply with the latest standards; these include flare pistols, launchers, mortars and artillery pieces.Notifying possession or transferShould an owner subsequently wish to sell or transfer their deactivated firearm, the Home O?ce would need to be notified about the transaction. Details on how to notify possession or transfer of deactivated firearms is contained in Home O?ce Circular 010/2019: Firearms Regulations 2019 and the Firearms (Amendment) (No.2) Rules 2019.Forms are available to notify possession, or transfer, of a deactivated firearm. Send completed forms to our dedicated inbox: deactivatedfirearmsnotifications@homeo?ce.gov.uk. Notification of transfers of a deactivated firearm to the appropriate national authority (ODT, 12.2 KB) Notification of possession of a deactivated firearm to the appropriate national authority (ODT, 10.3 KB)Deactivated firearms that fall outside the scope of Implementing Regulation 2018/337 do not need to be notified for either possession or transfer; these include flare pistols, launchers, mortars and artillery pieces.Deactivated firearms that were deactivated prior to 8 April 2016, do not need to be notified for possession.If you have any questions please contact public.enquiries@homeo?ce.gov.ukEarlier deactivation standardsThe current deactivation standards are as specified by the 2018 regulations. Some firearms were legally deactivated to a preceding standard and have remained unaltered in the owners possession.Deactivation certificates issued by the Proof Authority before the 2018 regulations came into force are still valid. It is only when the owner of a previously deactivated firearm seeks to transfer it, or to o?er to sell or gift the weapon, or sells or gifts the weapon, they will need to comply with the new standards.Details of earlier standards are listed below.8 April 2016: change in law a?ecting deactivated firearmsThe Implementing regulation - 2015/2403 ‘Establishing common guidelines on deactivation standards and techniques for ensuring that deactivated firearms are rendered irreversibly inoperable’ was published in the EU O?cial Journal on Saturday 19 December 2015. This has e?ect from 8 April 2016.All firearms submitted to the Proof Houses from 8 April must comply with Home O?ce guidance and additional measures relating to European Commission Regulation (EU) 2015/2403.15 December 2015: O?cial Journal on establishing common guidelines on deactivation standards and techniquesThis document should be read in conjunction with: Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) of 15 December 2015  Specifications for the adaptation of shotgun magazines and thedeactivation of firearms, revised 2010Arms falling outside of the scope of the regulation should continue to be deactivated in accordance with ‘Specifications for the adaptation of shotgun magazines and the deactivation of firearms, revised 2010’.Arms deactivated prior to the introduction of the regulation submitted for re- certification can still be issued with a UK valid only certificate. It must be noted that should the arm subsequently be sold, exported or fall within the remit of the regulation in any way, it must be brought up to the specification of the regulation.Double submissions will be required in all cases where the certifying body cannot readily inspect the arm to ensure that all work has been carried out in compliance with the regulation.Additional UK specific requirements (noted throughout) apply under Article 6, Directive (EU) 2015/1535 of the European parliament and of the council.2010: Adapting shotgun magazines and deactivating firearms2010 specifications for the deactivation of firearmsThese specifications still apply to firearms that fall outside the scope of Implementing Regulation 2018/337 including, but not limited to flare pistols, launchers, mortars and artillery pieces.Details: The Firearms (Amendment) Act 1988 defines the types of smooth- bore guns which may be held on a shotgun certificate.This document describes how another type of firearm may be classified as a shotgun if it is adapted in an approved way. It also contains guidance on deactivating firearms.From 8 April 2016 the deactivation of firearms is covered by EU Implementing Regulation 2015/2403, ‘Establishing common guidelines on deactivation standards and techniques for ensuring that deactivated firearms are rendered irreversibly inoperable’.Changes in the lawFirearms Act 2023When commenced, the Firearms Act 2023 will require operators of a miniature rifle range or shooting gallery, operating under section 11(4) of the Firearms Act 1968, to hold a firearms certificate. A new o?ence on the possession of component parts of ammunition with intent to illegally manufacture complete rounds will also be introduced. A Home O?ce Circular setting out the legislative arrangements will be published in due course.Home O?ce circularsCircular 005/2023: The Firearms (Air Weapons) (Eng land and Wales) Rules 2023, sets out changes to the Firearms Rules 1998 from 31 July 2023 relating to the storage of air weapons to prevent, so far as is reasonably practicable, access to the air weapon by a person under the age of eighteen.Contact the Firearms and Weapons Policy UnitEmail public.enquiries@homeo?ce.gov.uk for queries about UK firearms legislation and other firearms questions.Published 19 December 2012Last updated 2 May 2024 + show all updatesExplore the topicCrime preventionServices and informationGovernment activityBenefitsEducation and learningDepartmentsBirths, death, marriages and careEmploying peopleNewsBusiness and self-employedEnvironment and countrysideGuidance and regulationChildcare and parentingHousing and local servicesResearch and statisticsCitizenship and living in the UKMoney and taxPolicy papers and consultationsCrime, justice and the lawPassports, travel and living abroadTransparencyDisabled peopleVisas and immigrationHow government worksDriving and transportWorking , jobs and pensionsGet involved
Guide on Firearms Licensing LawNovember 2022
© Crown copyright 2022This publication is licensed under the terms of the Open Government Licence v3.0 except where otherwise stated. To view this licence, visit nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open- government-licence/version/3Where we have identified any third party copyright information you will need to obtain permission from the copyright holders concerned.
Contents
Guide on Firearms Licensing Law
Chapter 1: An overview – frequently asked questions about firearms licensing3Chapter 2: Definition and Classification of Firearms and Ammunition6Chapter 3: Prohibited Weapons and Ammunition20Chapter 4: Expanding Ammunition30Chapter 5: Restrictions on the Possession, Handling and Distribution of Firearms and Ammunition32Chapter 6: Exemptions from the requirement to hold a certificate40Chapter 7: Young people51Chapter 8: Antique firearms58Chapter 9: Historic handguns63Chapter 10: Firearm Certificate Procedure76Chapter 11: Shot gun Certificate Procedure87Chapter 12: Good reason to possess a firearm94Chapter 13: Law on Shooting Birds and Animals116Chapter 14: Permits131Chapter 15: Registration of firearms dealers134Chapter 16: Museum Firearms Licenses142Chapter 17: Rifle and muzzle-loading pistol clubs, schools and cadet corps147Chapter 18: Security of Firearms and Ammunition157Chapter 19: Fees167Chapter 20: Notices and Appeals172Chapter 21: Criminal use of Firearms176Chapter 22: Law Enforcement181Chapter 23: Proof of Firearms185Chapter 24: Surrender and disposal of firearms and ammunition1871
Guide on Firearms Licensing LawChapter 25: Northern Ireland	190Chapter 26: Visitors’ Permit Procedures	192Chapter 27: Import and export of firearms and ammunition	198Chapter 28: Authorisation of armed guards on UK registered ships	203Appendix 1: List of relevant organisations	210Appendix 2: List of firearms forms	212Appendix 3: Conditions for firearm certificates	213Appendix 4: Young persons and firearms law	219Appendix 5: Schedule of mass-produced antique air weapons whose production periodpre-dates 1939	220Appendix 6: Conditions for registration of firearms dealers	223Appendix 7: Guidance on secure keeping of firearms	224Appendix 8: Taking of firearms (including air weapons) to Northern Ireland by visitors from Great Britain	228Appendix 9: Conditions for visitor’s firearm or shot gun permit	2292
Guide on Firearms Licensing LawChapter 1: An overview – frequently asked questions about firearms licensingWhat is meant by the term ‘firearm’?1.1 ‘Firearm’ means a lethal barrelled weapon of any description from which any shot, bullet or other missile with kinetic energy of more than one joule at the muzzle of the weapon, can be discharged.See Chapter 2 for further details.What are the basic principles of firearms law in GB?1.2 GB firearms policy is based on the fact that firearms are dangerous weapons and the State has a duty to protect the public from their misuse. Gun ownership is a privilege, not a right. Firearms control in GB is among the toughest in the world and, as a result, firearms offences continue to make up a small proportion of recorded crime.What kind of firearm can be held on certificate?1.3 Some firearms and shot guns may be held on a firearm or shot gun certificate issued by the police. Low-powered air weapons are not licensed in England and Wales unless they are of a type declared specially dangerous by the Firearms (Dangerous Air Weapons) Rules 1969, but there are restrictions on their sale. An air weapon is “specially dangerous” if it is capable of discharging a missile with kinetic energy in excess, in the case of an air pistol, of 6 foot-pounds or, in the case of other air weapons,12 foot-pounds. “Specially dangerous” air pistols (and certain other air weapons) are prohibited weapons and may not be held on certificate.See Chapters 10 and 11 (on firearm certificate procedure and shot gun certificate procedure) for further details.Can anyone apply for a firearm certificate?1.4 Permission to possess, purchase or acquire a firearm will only be granted to an individual who is assessed by the licensing authority, the police, as not posing a threat to public safety and having good reason to own the firearm. Organisations such as target shooting clubs, museums and firearms dealers must also apply for licences if they wish to possess or use firearms. Persons who are sentenced to a term of imprisonment of three years or more cannot possess a firearm or ammunition (including antique firearms) at any time.3
Guide on Firearms Licensing LawSee Chapters 10 and 11 (on firearm certificate procedure and shot gun certificate procedure) for further details.Who authorises firearm and shot gun certificates?1.5 The police are the licensing authority for firearm and shot gun certificates, as well as for firearms dealers. The authority rests with local police forces rather than a central licensing authority because of the local information that police will use to inform their judgement. Applications for authority to possess prohibited weapons, such as handguns, in England and Wales are determined by the Home Office on behalf of the Secretary of State. Applications for such authority in Scotland are determined by the Scottish Government on behalf of Scottish Ministers.See Chapters 10, 11 and 15 (on firearm and shot gun certificate procedure and on registration as a firearms dealer) for further details.What is a ‘good reason’ to own a firearm?1.6 Applicants should be able to demonstrate to the police that they require their firearm on a regular, legitimate basis for work, sport or leisure (including collections or research). Chief officers are able to exercise discretion over what constitutes a good reason, judging each case on its own merits.See Chapter 12 for further details.How are firearms stored?1.7 The conditions of a firearm or shot gun certificate stipulate that guns must be stored securely so as to prevent access by an unauthorised person. The manner in which they are stored depends on the individual property and circumstances.See Chapter 18 for further details.What happens to firearms in the event of the death of the owner?1.8 In the event of the death of a certificate holder, the person inheriting the effects must surrender or declare the weapons to the police or a registered firearms dealer. Failure to do so would result in the inheritor being in breach of the law by having the firearms in their possession; it is the responsibility of the inheritor to find out whether firearms are part of the deceased’s effects. Registered firearms dealers will be able to advise on the value of the items and how best to proceed in accordance with the inheritor’s wishes. Options include applying for a certificate, selling/transferring the firearm (for example, to a museum or a certificate holder) or destroying it.See Chapters 5, 14 and 24 for further details.4
Guide on Firearms Licensing LawWhat should I do if I have concerns about a firearm owner?1.9 Any concerns should be reported to your local police force.What is the government doing to prevent 3D printed guns being used?1.10 If someone were to possess, purchase, manufacture or sell a firearm or its component parts otherwise than in accordance with the requirements of sections 1, 3 and 5 of the Firearms Act 1968, they would be liable to prosecution.See Chapter 3 for more details.Where can I find information about shooting clubs, museums or firearms dealers?1.11 Detailed information about firearms dealers can be found in Chapter 15, museums in Chapter 16 and shooting clubs in Chapter 17.5
Guide on Firearms Licensing LawChapter 2: Definition and Classification of Firearms and Ammunition2.1 This chapter provides definitions of firearms, component parts, shot guns, deactivated firearms and defectively deactivated firearms, imitation and realistic imitation firearms, including readily convertible imitations, some information on antiques (which are covered more fully in Chapter 8), and firearms conversion. It goes on to define various types of firearms and ammunition for which no certificate is required, including certain types of air weapons.2.2 The definitions of ‘firearm’, ‘lethal barrelled weapon’, ‘shot gun’ and ‘ammunition’ for the purposes of the Firearms Acts are set out in section 57 of the Firearms Act 1968 (“the principal Act”) and are set out below. The definition of ‘firearm’ extends to certain imitation firearms (see paragraphs 2.32 to 2.36).Definition of ‘firearm’ and ‘lethal barrelled weapon’2.3 Section 57 of the principal Act (as amended) defines a ‘firearm’ as (i) a lethal barrelled weapon of any description from which any shot, bullet or other missile can be discharged with kinetic energy of more than one joule at the muzzle of the weapon (ii) a prohibited weapon (iii) any relevant component part (see below and Chapter 12) of such a lethal barrelled or prohibited weapon, and (iv) any accessory to a lethal barrelled or prohibited weapon designed or adapted to diminish the noise or flash caused by firing the weapon.Definition of ‘airsoft’ gun2.4 An ‘airsoft’ gun as defined in section 57A of the 1968 Act is not regarded as a firearm for the purposes of that Act. Section 57A defines an airsoft gun as a barrelled weapon of any description which is designed to discharge only a small plastic missile (whether or not it is also capable of discharging any other kind of missile) and is not capable of discharging a missile of any kind above the permitted kinetic energy thresholds at the muzzle of the weapon (see below). A ‘small plastic missile’ is defined in section 57A(3) as a missile that:a) is made wholly or partly from plastics;b) is spherical, andc) does not exceed 8 millimetres in diameter.Section 57A(4) sets the maximum permitted kinetic energy levels for airsoft guns at:a) 1.3 joules if the weapon is capable of discharging two or more missiles successively without repeated pressure on the trigger, and6
Guide on Firearms Licensing Lawb) 2.5 joules in any other case.Definition of ‘relevant component part’2.5 A ‘relevant component part’ of a lethal barrelled or prohibited weapon is a firearm in its own right and is defined in section 57(1D) of the 1968 Act as:a) a barrel, chamber or cylinder,b) a frame, body or receiver,c) a breech block, bolt or other mechanism for containing the pressure of discharge at the rear of a chamber,but only where the item is capable of being used as a part of a lethal barrelled weapon or a prohibited weapon.Definition of ‘shot gun’2.6 A “shot gun” is defined in section 1(3)(a) of the 1968 Act and means a smooth-bore gun (not being an air gun) which:a) has a barrel not less than 24 inches in length and does not have any barrel with a bore exceeding 2 inches in diameter. The length of the barrel is measured from the muzzle to the point of ignition (breech face). For a muzzle-loading gun, the point of ignition may be taken as the touch-hole or nipple that is nearest to the breech;b) either has no magazine or has a non-detachable magazine incapable of holding more than two cartridges (see paragraphs 2.12 to 2.14 for further information). It should be noted that under section 1(3A) of the 1968 Act a gun that has been adapted to have such a magazine only meets this criterion if the magazine bears an approved mark and the adaptation has been certified in writing either by one of the two Proof Houses or by such other person as the Secretary of State has designated, as having been carried out in a manner approved by the Secretary of State; andc) is not a revolver gun (that is, a gun containing a series of chambers, which revolve as part of the firing cycle).2.7 When considering the classification of smooth-bore guns, special attention must be paid to the length of the barrel and the overall length. With the exception of those chambered for .22 rim-fire cartridges, section 5(1)(ac) of the 1968 Act raised to the prohibited category (see Chapter 3) all self-loading and pump-action models which are either short-barrelled (under 24 inches) or short in overall length (under 40 inches). For the purpose of calculating overall length any detachable, retractable or other movable butt-stock should be disregarded. References to ‘shot guns’ in the 1968 Act may be taken generally to mean shot guns which fall within section 2 of that Act, rather than those subject to sections 1 and 5 of the 1968 Act, unless otherwise stated.7
Guide on Firearms Licensing Law2.8 While overall length is not a relevant factor in regard to the classification of traditional single and double-barrelled smooth-bore guns and repeating shot guns with a bolt or lever-action, any such guns with barrels under 24 inches in length are subject to control under section 1(3)(a)(i) of the 1968 Act. Also controlled under section 1(3)(a)(ii) is any repeating shot gun, not otherwise prohibited by virtue of its barrel length or overall length, with a magazine capacity in excess of two cartridges.2.9 Section 5(1)(ad) of the 1968 Act raised to the prohibited category any smooth-bore revolver gun other than one that is chambered for 9mm rim-fire cartridges or is a muzzle-loading revolver gun. The first exemption is understood to cover ‘ratting’ or ‘garden’ guns. Since section 1(3)(a) of the 1968 Act does not permit any revolver gun to be regarded as a ‘shot gun’, smooth-bore revolver guns which are chambered for 9mm rim-fire or muzzle-loading guns are classed as firearms and subject to control under section 1 of the 1968 Act.2.10 For the purposes only of sections 3(1) and 45(2) of the 1968 Act, and in the definition of ‘firearms dealer’ in section 57(4), the term ‘shot gun’ also includes any component part of a shot gun and any accessory to a shot gun designed or adapted to diminish the noise or flash caused by firing the gun. For the purposes of all other sections/Acts, the component parts of shot guns are not subject to control under the Firearms Acts. See section 57(4) of the 1968 Act.Definition of ‘ammunition’2.11 ‘Ammunition’ means ammunition for any firearm and includes grenades, bombs and other like missiles, whether capable of use with a firearm or not; and also includes prohibited ammunition. It should be noted that the definition of ammunition does not include ingredients and components of ammunition; it is only assembled ammunition that is controlled under the Act, not component parts. Empty cartridge cases, for example, are not ‘ammunition’. There are two exceptions to this. The first is missiles for ammunition prohibited under section 5 of the 1968 Act, for example, expanding ammunition which can only be used in a pistol, or armour- piercing bullets. Such missiles are themselves defined as ‘ammunition’ and are subject to control accordingly (see Chapter 3). The second is primers - section 35 of the Violent Crime Reduction Act 2006 introduced controls on the purchase and sale of a cap type primer designed for use in metallic ammunition (see Chapter 5).Proof House certification of adapted shot guns2.12 Section 1(3A) of the 1968 Act as amended by section 2(3) of the Firearms (Amendment) Act 1988 requires that any smooth-bore gun adapted to have a non- detachable magazine incapable of holding more than two cartridges must bear a Proof House mark and have been certified to that effect. This requirement applies not only to those smooth-bore guns already in circulation which have been adapted, but also to those smooth-bore guns which are adapted by the maker subsequent to manufacture but prior to distribution or sale. In both cases such guns are regarded as having been ‘adapted’ within the meaning of section 1(3A) of the 1968 Act, which was inserted by 2(3) of the 1988 Act.8
Guide on Firearms Licensing Law2.13 The marking and certification requirement does not, however, apply in the case of smoothbore guns, which are manufactured with a non-detachable magazine incapable of holding more than two cartridges. Such guns are not regarded as having been ‘adapted’ within the meaning of section 2(3) since the capacity of the magazine will be secured during the process of manufacture. Although the guns need not comply with the Secretary of State’s specifications, the magazine must meet the requirement in section 1(3)(a)(ii) of the 1968 Act; that is, the magazine must be incapable of holding more than two cartridges.2.14 When assessing the magazine capacity of a firearm, consideration should be given to the number of cartridges that the firearm was designed or proofed to take. For example, where a shot gun has a magazine which is capable of holding three cartridges but was designed to hold only two, the shot gun should be considered a section 2 firearm rather than a section 1 firearm. Although interpretation of the law is ultimately a matter for the courts, it is thought unlikely, for example, that the insertion of a plastic or wooden plug into a large capacity fixed magazine would, of itself, be regarded as rendering that gun as having a magazine incapable of holding more than two cartridges. The restriction would need to be of an equivalent standard to the methods set out in the Home Office approved specifications in order to meet the requirements of section 1(3)(a)(ii).Deactivated firearms2.15 Within the context of section 38 of the Violent Crime Reduction Act 2006, a ‘deactivated firearm’ means an imitation that consists of something which was a firearm but has been rendered incapable of discharging a shot, bullet, or other missile. Section 8 of the 1988 Act provides that, unless it can be shown otherwise, a firearm which has been deactivated to a standard approved by the Secretary of State, so that it is incapable of discharging any shot, bullet or other missile, is presumed not to be a firearm within the meaning of the 1968 Act and therefore is not subject to control if it bears a mark approved by the Secretary of State for denoting that fact. The 1988 Act requires that one of the two Proof Houses or some other person approved by the Secretary of State has marked the firearm and certified in writing (that is, provided a certificate) that it has been deactivated to the approved standard. No other person has been approved for this purpose. A deactivated firearm is also to be treated as an imitation firearm, and by virtue of section 24A of the 1968 Act can only be bought by or sold to someone aged 18 or over2.16 Deactivation specifications were first set by the Home Office in 1989. They were revised in 1995 and again in 2010. These specifications came into force on1 October 1995 and 17 December 2010, and are not retrospective. Therefore, a gun deactivated to the old specifications prior to revisions, remains deactivated for legal purposes.2.17 The 1995 (and to some extent 2010) specifications encompassed a substantially greater range of firearms design and are generally more stringent than the preceding (1989) standards.2.18 Section 8 of the 1988 Act is an evidential provision and does not preclude the possibility that a firearm which has been deactivated in some other manner may also have ceased to be a firearm within the meaning of the 1968 Act. For example, guns held by museums that were recovered from wrecked ships and aircraft may9
Guide on Firearms Licensing Lawbe corroded to the point that they cannot be fired. This should not be confused with wear or missing parts that can be replaced. The final arbiter of whether the article fulfils the definition of a firearm for the purposes of section 57(1) of the 1968 Act is a court.2.19 See the gov.uk website for published information on the current UK standards which are designed to ensure that deactivated firearms are rendered irreversibly inoperable. These standards came into force on 28 June 2018 and have been applied by the Proof Houses to firearms submitted to them on or after that date. The standards do not apply to firearms deactivated prior to then unless those firearms are transferred or placed on the market.Defectively deactivated firearms2.20 Section 8A of the Firearms (Amendment) Act 1988 requires the Secretary of State to publish technical standards for deactivation. The link in the previous paragraph refers. The Act introduced a new offence of making a defectively deactivated weapon available for sale or as a gift to another person or to sell it or give it (as a gift) to another person. The offence does not apply if the weapon is made available for sale or as a gift to a person who is outside of the UK on thebasis that if the sale or gift were to take place, the weapon would be transferred to a place outside of the UK.2.21 An exception under the 1988 Act applies to museums that hold a museum firearms licence. Such museums can continue to make available for sale or as a gift (as the case may be), defectively deactivated firearms to another museum firearms licence holder without the need for the firearms to be deactivated to newer standards.2.22 Something is a ‘defectively deactivated weapon’ if:a) it was at any time a firearmb) it has been rendered incapable of discharging any shot, bullet or other missile (and, accordingly, has either ceased to be a firearm or is a firearm only by virtue of the Firearms Act 1982), butc) it has not been rendered so incapable in a way that meets the technical specifications for the deactivation of the weapon that apply at the time when the weapon is made available for sale or as a gift or (as the case may be) when it is sold or given as a gift.2.23 A person guilty of an offence under this section is, on summary conviction, liable to a term of imprisonment not exceeding 12 months (or, in relation to offences committed before paragraph 24(2) of Schedule 22 to the Sentencing Act 2020 comes into force, 6 months) or to a fine, or to both. On conviction on indictment, the maximum sentence is imprisonment for a term not exceeding 5 years or to a fine, or to both.2.24 See the gov.uk website for further information on deactivation specifications.10
Guide on Firearms Licensing LawNotifying the Home Office of the transfer or possession of a deactivated firearm2.25 The Firearms Regulations 2019 require the notification to the Home Office, as the relevant national authority, of possession of a deactivated firearm and their transfer – but only when the transfer is for a period of more than 14 days.2.26 Owners of deactivated firearms need to notify the transfer or possession as follows:ï Deactivated firearms being transferred for a period of 14 days or more, regardless of when they were acquired, need to be notified and the firearm must meet current deactivation standards before being transferred.ï Home Office Circular 010/2019 explains the changes in more detail.ï There are two forms on gov.uk to be used for the notification or transfer of deactivated firearms. The required information must then be submitted either by email to: deactivatedfirearmsnotifications@homeoffice.gov.uk or by registered post or recorded delivery to:Deactivated Firearms Notification Home OfficeFirearms Policy Unit 5th Floor, Fry Building 2 Marsham Street LondonSW1P 4DF2.27 It is an offence under regulation 2(1) of The Firearms Regulations 2019 if a person transfers a deactivated firearm to another person and does not give notice of the transfer to the appropriate national authority in accordance with regulation 2(2). A person guilty of an offence under regulation 2(1) is liable to a fine of up to £200.2.28 Under Regulation 3(1), a person in possession of a deactivated firearm for a period of more than 14 days commits an offence if they fail to give notice of the deactivated firearm to the appropriate national authority unless the deactivated firearm has been transferred to that person and the transfer has already been notified by the person transferring it. In most instances this will avoid the need for the same deactivated firearm to be declared twice. Where a person in possession of a deactivated firearm commits an offence under regulation 3(1), it is a defence for that person to show that they reasonably believed that the transferor had given, or would give, notice of the transfer in accordance with the arrangements set out within regulation 2. A person guilty of an offence under this regulation is liable to a level 1 fine (£200).Readily convertible imitation firearms2.29 Section 1 of the Firearms Act 1982 extended the provisions of section 1 of the 1968 Act to certain imitation firearms. Therefore, a firearm certificate is required to possess, purchase or acquire an imitation firearm which:11
Guide on Firearms Licensing Lawa) has the appearance of being a firearm to which section 1 of the 1968 Act applies; andb) is so constructed or adapted as to be readily convertible into a firearm to which that section applies.2.30 Under section 1(6) of the 1982 Act, an imitation firearm is regarded as readily convertible into a firearm to which section 1 of the 1968 Act applies if:a) it can be converted without any special skill on the part of the person converting it in the construction or adaptation of firearms of any description; andb) the work involved in converting it does not require equipment or tools other than such as are in common use by persons carrying out works of construction and maintenance in their own homes.Section 1(5) of the 1982 Act provides a defence for a person accused of an offence to show that he did not know, and had no reason to suspect, that the imitation firearm` was so constructed or adapted as to be readily convertible into a firearm to which section 1 of the Act applies.Guidelines on the 1982 Act2.31 Guidelines have been issued which advise on the technical measures that can be taken to prevent an imitation firearm from being readily convertible into a lethal barrelled weapon. These guidelines are intended primarily for the gun trade and are available from representative organisations, such as the Gun Trade Association.Offences involving imitation firearms2.32 Section 16A of the 1968 Act makes it an offence to possess any firearm or imitation firearm with intent to cause, or to enable another person to cause, someone else to fear that unlawful violence will be used against them or another person. It provides for a maximum penalty of 10 years’ imprisonment or a fine, or both.2.33 Under section 20 of the 1968 Act it is an offence to trespass with an imitation firearm. The maximum penalty for such an offence is 6 months imprisonment (for trespass in a building) or 3 months (for trespass on land). The offence of trespassing with an imitation firearm in a building (in contrast to the offence committed with a firearm as defined by section 57(1) of the 1968 Act) is triable only summarily. Section 46(1)(b) of the 1968 Act (police powers of search with a warrant) applies to the seizure of imitation firearms as well as real firearms. See Part 1 of Schedule 6 to the 1968 for a list of the penalties that apply to the criminal offences in that Act.2.34 Under section 19 of the 1968 Act, it is an offence for a person to carry an imitation firearm in a public place without lawful authority or reasonable excuse (see also Chapter 21). The maximum custodial sentence is 12 months for this offence (as it relates to imitation firearms).12
Guide on Firearms Licensing Law2.35 Section 24A of the Firearms Act 1968, as inserted by section 40 of the Violent Crime Reduction Act, makes it an offence for anyone aged under 18 to purchase an imitation firearm and for anyone to sell an imitation firearm to someone aged under 18. There is a defence for anyone charged with the offence of selling an imitation firearm to someone under 18, where they can show that they had reasonable grounds for believing the purchaser to be 18 or over.2.36 Section 4A of the Firearms Act 1968 makes it an offence for a person, other than a registered firearms dealer, a) to have in his or her possession or under his or her control an article that is capable of being used (whether by itself or with other articles) to convert an imitation firearm into a firearm and, b) the person intends to use the article (whether by itself or with other articles) to convert an imitation firearm into a firearm. A person guilty of an offence under this section is, on summary conviction, liable to a term of imprisonment not exceeding 12 months (or, in relation to offences committed in England and Wales before paragraph 24(2) of Schedule 22 to the Sentencing Act 2020 comes into force, 6 months) or to a fine, or to both. On conviction on indictment, the maximum sentence is imprisonment for a term not exceeding 5 years or to a fine, or to both.Realistic imitation firearms2.37 Section 36 of the Violent Crime Reduction Act 2006 makes it an offence for a person to manufacture, sell, import or cause a realistic imitation firearm to be brought into Great Britain. The Act also makes it an offence to modify an imitation firearm so that it becomes a realistic imitation firearm. Section 38(1) defines a ‘realistic imitation firearm’ as an imitation firearm which:a) has an appearance that is so realistic as to make it indistinguishable, for all practical purposes, from a real firearm; andb) is neither a deactivated firearm nor an antique.2.38 This definition of ‘realistic imitation firearm’ applies for the purposes of sections 36 and 37 of the 2006 Act. The term 'real firearm' is defined in section 38(7) as either a firearm of an actual make or model of a modern firearm, or a generic modern firearm. The term 'modern firearm' is defined in subsection 8 as a firearm other than one whose appearance would tend to identify it as having a design and mechanism of a sort first dating before 1870.2.39 Section 37 of the 2006 Act provides for a number of specified defences, which apply for the offence under section 36, where a realistic imitation firearm is made available for one or more of the following purposes:i) for the purposes of a museum or galleryii) for the purposes of theatrical performances and of rehearsals for such performancesiii) in the production of films (within the meaning of Part 1 of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988)iv) in the production of television programmes (within the meaning of the Communications Act 2003))13
Guide on Firearms Licensing Lawv) for the organisation and holding of historical re-enactments organised and held by persons specified or described for the purposes of this section by regulations made by the Secretary of State (see below)vi) for the purposes of functions that a person has in their capacity as a person in the service of His Majesty.2.40 Section 37(3) of the 2006 Act provides a further defence for businesses to import realistic imitation firearms for the purpose of modifying them so that they cease to be realistic imitation firearms.2.41 The Violent Crime Reduction Act 2006 (Realistic Imitation Firearms) Regulations 2007 (SI 2007/2606) provides two further defences which apply to an offence under section 36 of the 2006 Act. The first is a defence for making a realistic imitation firearm available for ‘permitted activities’, defined as “the acting out of military or law enforcement scenarios for the purposes of recreation” and primarily intended to cover those participating in airsoft skirmishing. It is a requirement under the regulations that third party liability insurance is held in connection with such activities. The second is a defence for display of realistic imitation firearms at a ‘permitted event’, defined as a commercial event at which firearms or realistic imitation firearms (or both) are offered for sale or displayed (i.e. arms fairs).2.42 The Regulations also specify that those relying on the historical re-enactment defence must have third party liability insurance in connection with the organisation and holding of historical re-enactments. Where a person indicates that they wish to buy a realistic imitation firearm for airsoft skirmishing, retailers should seek to determine that the prospective buyer holds third party liability insurance in connection with the organisation and holding of the recreational acting out of military or law enforcement scenarios. In many cases airsoft players will be members of clubs which are members of the United Kingdom Airsoft Retailers Association (UKARA). UKARA operates a database, which keeps a record of participating airsoft players and game sites, and is used for identification purposes. Equally, where a person intends to buy a realistic imitation firearm for the purposes of historical re-enactment, retailers should check that the prospective buyer is a member of a club or society recognised by the National Association of Re- enactment Societies (NAReS) or an organisation of similar standing prior to making a sale.2.43 In determining whether an imitation firearm is to be considered a realistic imitation firearm, section 38(3)(a) of the 2006 Act states that its size, shape and principal colour are to be taken into account. Section 38(3)(b) confirms that an imitation is to be regarded as distinguishable if its size, shape or principal colour is unrealistic for a real firearm. The Violent Crime Reduction Act 2006 (Realistic Imitation Firearms) Regulations 2007 specify a set of colours and dimensions in order to distinguish between imitation firearms and realistic imitation firearms. An imitation firearm with dimensions less than 38 mm in height and 70mm in length is to be regarded as unrealistic. An imitation firearm which is principally coloured bright red, bright orange, bright yellow, bright green, bright pink, bright purple, bright blue, or which is transparent should also be regarded as unrealistic.2.44 An imitation firearm whose principal colour is not one of those listed in the Regulations does not automatically fail to be regarded as realistic, although it is more likely that that will be the case. In these circumstances, the general test of14
Guide on Firearms Licensing Lawwhether it is distinguishable from a real firearm, taking into account its size, colour etc. should be applied.Specifications for blank firing imitation firearms2.45 Under section 39 of the Violent Crime Reduction Act 2006, it is an offence to manufacture or import an imitation firearm which does not conform to specifications set out in the Violent Crime Reduction Act 2006 (Specification for Imitation Firearms) Regulations 2011 (SI 2011/1754) (“the 2011 Regulations”). It is also an offence to modify an imitation firearm so that it does not conform to the specifications or to modify a firearm to create an imitation firearm which does not confirm to the regulations. Accordingly, all blank firing imitation firearms, i.e. imitation firearms capable of firing a blank cartridge, and blank firing imitation revolvers must conform to the specifications set out in regulations 4 and 6 of the 2011 Regulations respectively. Under regulation 7 of the 2011 Regulations, the offence in section 39(2)(d) of the 2006 Act of importing an imitation firearm which does not conform to the specifications does not apply where the imitation firearm was imported for one of the reasons specified in section 37(2) of the 2006 Act (see paragraph 2.39).Small firearms2.46 Section 5 of the 1968 Act prohibits any firearm which either has a barrel less than 30cm in length or is less than 60cm in length overall, other than an air weapon, a muzzle-loading gun or a firearm designed as signalling apparatus. The intention was to prohibit certain particularly dangerous firearms which were easy to conceal. In general terms, this has meant the prohibition of handguns but it is important to remember that the legislation does not refer explicitly to handguns; instead it refers to small firearms. For exemptions to the requirement to obtain the Secretary of State’s authority to possess prohibited firearms see Chapter 3.Antiques2.47 Apart from sections 19, 20 and 21, Schedule 3, and any other provision of the 1968 Act so far as it applies in relation to an offence under the aforementioned sections, the provisions of the 1968 Act do not apply to antique firearms kept as curiosities or ornaments (section 58(2) of the 1968 Act refers) (see chapters 5 and 8). The Antique Firearms Regulations 2021 specify which firearms can be regarded as antique, and further details are set out in Chapter 8.Firearms and ammunition for which no certificate is required2.48 Firearm and shot gun certificates are required in respect of the majority of firearms and ammunition. However, the following types are exempt:15
Guide on Firearms Licensing LawAir and gas operated weapons and their ammunition2.49 Air guns, air rifles and air pistols are exempt from the certification requirement if they are not of a type declared specially dangerous by the Firearms (Dangerous Air Weapons) Rules 1969 (SI 1969/47) (“the 1969 Rules”), as amended by the Firearms (Dangerous Air Weapons) (Amendment) Rules 1993 (SI 1993/1490), or the Firearms (Dangerous Air Weapons) (Scotland) Rules 1969 (SI 1969/270), as amended by the Firearms (Dangerous Air Weapons) (Scotland) Amendment Rules 1993 (SI 1993/1541).2.50 The 1969 Rules provide that any air weapon is ‘specially dangerous’ if it is capable of discharging a missile so that the missile has, on being discharged from the muzzle of the weapon, kinetic energy in excess, in the case of an air pistol, of 6 foot-pounds or, in the case of an air weapon other than an air pistol, 12 foot- pounds. An air rifle with a muzzle energy in excess of 12 foot-pounds must be held on a firearm certificate. Any short air weapons (which either have a barrel less than 30cm in length or are less than 60cm in length overall), with a muzzle energy in excess of 6 foot-pounds are prohibited firearms.2.51 If there is doubt about a particular air weapon, police forces should seek advice from forensic science service providers. It should be noted that the firing capabilities have been found to differ between particular weapons of the same model. It should not be automatically assumed that all specimens of a particular model of air gun produce exactly the same muzzle energy, particularly if its published power level approaches the 6 foot-pounds or 12 foot-pounds levels, as appropriate to its type. Testing of air weapons for the purposes of determining their status under the current legislation should only be carried out under strictly controlled circumstances. Forensic science service providers can offer help and advice.2.52 By virtue of section 48 of the 1997 Act, firearms using compressed carbon dioxide as the power source are treated as air weapons and, if not regarded as ‘specially dangerous’ (over 6 foot-pounds in the case of a pistol or 12 foot-pounds in the case of other air guns and air rifles) are thus exempt from the firearm certificate procedure. Firearms using other gases are not so exempt.2.53 It should be noted that the majority but by no means all guns powered by carbon dioxide which discharge paint pellets and which are used in adventure games are unlikely to cause serious injury, nor were they designed as ‘weapons’. As such, they should not be considered to be firearms.2.54 Ammunition for air weapons and other weapons using compressed gas is exempt from the certification procedure.2.55 The 1969 Rules do not apply to an air weapon designed for use only when submerged in water, such as harpoon guns.Air weapons in Scotland2.56 Section B4 of Part 2 of Schedule 5 to the Scotland Act 1998 reserves the subject matter of the Firearms Acts 1968 to 1997. Section 10 of the Scotland Act 2012 amends section B4 to create an exception to that reservation. The amendment gives legislative competence to the Scottish Parliament in relation to the regulation of air weapons within the meaning of section 1(3)(b) of the Firearms Act 1968 (air16
Guide on Firearms Licensing Lawweapons not declared specially dangerous by rules made by the Secretary of State under section 53 of the 1968 Act). Section 2 of the Air Weapons and Licensing (Scotland) Act 2015 makes it an offence for a person to use, possess, purchase or acquire an air weapon in Scotland without holding an air weapon certificate issued by Police Scotland. For more detailed information about air weapons laws in Scotland please refer to the guidance issued by the Scottish Government: Air weapon licensing in Scotland: guide.Shot gun cartridges2.57 A shot gun certificate is not required to possess or acquire shot gun cartridges containing five or more shot, none of which exceeds .36 inch in diameter. All ordinary shot cartridges are covered by this description. However, a shot gun certificate (or firearm certificate authorising possession of a section 1 shot gun) is normally required to purchase shot gun cartridges. All single bulleted ammunition, for example solid slug, spherical ball or projectiles for birdscaring equipment, is subject to the requirement for a firearm certificate.Blank cartridges2.58 Blank cartridges not exceeding 1 inch in diameter are also exempt from the certification procedure.Display Boards and decorative purposes2.59 In the absence of a court ruling, inert cartridges and ammunition mounted on display boards are not regarded as being subject to the Acts. Similarly, inert bullets mounted on key rings or cuff links are assumed to be exempt.2.60 It should be noted that exemption from the certification procedure does not automatically exempt a firearm from all the other provisions of the Act. A person found trespassing with a low-powered air weapon, for example, might still be charged with “armed” trespass. It is also an offence for a person prohibited by the terms of section 21 of the 1968 Act to be in possession of an air gun or ammunition for it.Other classes of firearms and ammunition2.61 When considering whether a particular weapon should be regarded as a firearm to which sections 1, 2 or 5 of the 1968 Act applies or which is covered by the 1982 Act, it is important to remember that the purpose of the legislation is to control the supply and possession of all rifles, guns and pistols which could be used for criminal or subversive purposes while recognising that individuals may own and use firearms and other devices for legitimate purposes. In the absence of a decision by a court, the Secretary of State takes the view that the following devices should not be regarded as firearms within the definition of the Act:a) captive-bolt stunning devices (where the bolt remains attached to the barrel) used in the slaughter of animals, operated by blank cartridges or pneumatically;17
Guide on Firearms Licensing Lawb) nail guns, designed as tools for the insertion of nails, metal pins and threaded bolts into solid objects;c) alarm guns, which are devices operated by a trip wire for the detonation of small explosive charges;d) line throwing implements used for saving life of those in vessels in distress;e) net throwing guns which are devices designed for the live capture of birds and animals (but not those net throwing guns which are designed for law enforcement purposes);f) rocket signal and illuminating devices (but not signalling pistols or hand-held devices using cartridges, and which discharge a signal or illuminating load from a fixed barrel);g) fuse igniting pistols designed to ignite a slow burning pyrotechnic fuse or shock cord by firing a primer or blank cartridge;h) cable cutters and cable spikers (designed to earth the residual electronic charge held in high voltage cables) fired by blank cartridges;i) harpoon guns utilising a spigot and fired by blank cartridge, such as the Greener harpoon gun;j) dummy and target launchers (designed to project a dummy for dog training or an artificial target for shooting), utilising a spigot and powered by blank cartridges;k) armoured fighting vehicle (AFV) smoke dischargers used to project pyrotechnics for smoke screening; andl) sleeve type chamber inserts for use in a shot gun or rifle); and,m) rifled choke tubes for shot guns are considered to be an accessory and not an essential component part of a firearm as specified by section 57 of the 1968 Act.Conversion of firearms2.62 Section 7(1)(a) of the Firearms (Amendment) Act 1988 (as amended by the 1997 Act) provides that if any weapon has at any time been a weapon to which section 5(1) or 5(1A) of the 1968 Act applies, it shall be treated as a prohibited weapon regardless of anything done for the purpose of converting it into a weapon of a different kind. Thus a fully automatic weapon such as a Bren gun which has been smooth-bored and adapted to single-shot would still be classified as a prohibited weapon, as would a pistol that had a 24 inch or more smoothbore barrel fitted to it.2.63 Section 7(1)(b) provides an exception in respect of self-loading or pump-action smooth-bore guns which have at some time possessed a barrel under 24 inches (and would otherwise be caught under section 5(1)(ac) of the 1968 Act) and which at the present time have a barrel of 24 inches or more. This takes account of the fact that some self-loading and pump-action smooth-bore guns are18
Guide on Firearms Licensing Lawmanufactured so as to readily accommodate, and with equal facility, interchangeable barrels of varying lengths, which may be more or less than 24 inches. The exception therefore protects a person who acquires such a gun in its long-barrelled mode without being aware that in the past it had been fitted with a shorter barrel.2.64 Section 7(2) of the 1988 Act provides that a weapon which:a) has at any time since the coming into force of section 2 of the 1988 Act (which required a firearm certificate for certain types of shot gun) been a weapon to which section 1 of the 1968 applies; orb) would at any previous time have been such a weapon had the 1988 Act been in force,shall, if it has, or at any time has had, a rifled barrel of less than 24 inches be a section 1 firearm, irrespective of any work done to convert it into a shot gun or an air weapon.2.65 However, section 7(3) of the 1988 Act exempts from the provisions of section 7(2) any firearm where the barrel has been shortened by a registered firearms dealer for the sole purpose of replacing part of it so as to produce a barrel not less than 24 inches in length. This allows firearms dealers to cut off from a rifled barrel which is 24 inches or greater in length a damaged or worn part, drill out the rifling from the remaining part of the barrel and add a smooth-bored section so as to produce a barrel not less than 24 inches in length.2.66 This exemption refers only to guns that have at some time had barrels less than 24 inches in length solely by virtue of such work having been carried out by a registered firearms dealer. Guns which have at any time had a barrel less than 24 inches in length for some other reason cannot benefit from this exemption even if they are subsequently shortened again by a registered firearms dealer for the purpose stated. This covers the conversion of firearms and does not impinge on the destruction of a firearm by a dealer cutting it into pieces, including the barrels.19
Guide on Firearms Licensing LawChapter 3: Prohibited Weapons and Ammunition3.1 This chapter defines weapons and ammunition prohibited under the terms of section 5 of the 1968 Act. It explains the arrangements whereby the Secretary of State grants authorities for possessing section 5 weapons and ammunition, and the various exemptions from the requirement to possess this authority. Where this chapter refers to an authority of the Secretary of State, that authority is exercised by the Scottish Ministers in or as regards ScotlandDefinitions3.2 Sections 5(1) and 5(1A) of the 1968 Act, make it unlawful to purchase, acquire or possess, without the authority of the Secretary of State, any prohibited weapon or ammunition. There are additional offences under section 5(2A) covering the unlawful manufacture, sale or transfer of any prohibited weapon or ammunition, the unlawful possession of prohibited weapons or ammunition for sale or transfer, and the unlawful purchase or acquisition of prohibited weapons or ammunition for sale or transfer.3.3 Those weapons and ammunition which are prohibited consist of:i) any firearm which is so designed or adapted that two or more missiles can be successively discharged without repeated pressure on the trigger (section 5(1)(a));o Section 5(1)(a) includes weapons such as machine guns, sub-machine guns, chain guns and the so-called ‘burst-fire’ weapons in which several missiles (typically 3-5) are discharged in succession on a single application of the trigger. Case law also suggests that the courts should consider the actual operation of the firearm rather than the intent of the designers.ii) any self-loading or pump-action rifled gun other than one which is chambered for.22 rim-fire cartridges (section 5(1)(ab));o Section 5(1)(ab) includes carbines, which are included in the definition of a rifle in section 57(4) of the 1968 Act. Originally, a carbine was a short musket or rifle intended for use by mounted troops, but the term has come to mean any rifle with a short barrel.o Also caught in this category are the so-called ‘hybrid’ firearms such as the Colt Armalite AR-15 ‘pistol’. These weapons are self-loading versions of long arms made to operate in self-loading mode only and sold without a shoulder stock. The term ‘automatic’ is also sometimes incorrectly applied to self-loading pistols.20
Guide on Firearms Licensing Lawiii) any firearm which either has a barrel less than 30 centimetres in length or is less than 60 centimetres in length overall, other than an air weapon, a muzzle- loading gun or a firearm designed as signalling apparatus (section 5(1)(aba));o Section 5(1)(aba) affects small firearms that are easily concealed. Muzzle- loading firearms (including cap and ball revolvers) and flare pistols are excluded. It should be remembered that the 1997 Act did not ban pistols as such and was drafted in terms of small firearms. NB: section 5(1)(aba) includes ‘specially dangerous’ air pistols and ‘specially dangerous’ short air rifles.o In terms of measurement, section 57(6) of the 1968 Act makes provision for the barrel to be measured from the muzzle to the point at which the charge is exploded on firing. In measuring the overall length, any detachable, folding, retractable or other movable butt-stock should be disregarded in accordance with section 5(8) of the 1968 Act.o Any long-barrelled pistols with dimensions greater than those stipulated in section 5(1)(aba) of the 1968 Act (such as the long barrelled Uberti Cattleman revolver) are not caught by this section of the Act and may legally be held on a firearm certificate.o The Olympic .380 BBM starting pistol was identified as readily convertible in 2010 and now falls within the definition of a prohibited firearm under section 5(1)(aba).iv) any self-loading or pump-action smooth-bore gun which is not an air weapon or chambered for .22 rim-fire cartridges and either has a barrel less than 24 inches in length or is less than 40 inches in length overall (section 5(1)(ac));o Section 5(1)(ac) covers short-barrelled or short overall length pump-action and self-loading shot guns, which may have folding or retracting shoulder stocks. Short barrelled smooth bore ‘specially dangerous’ air weapons also fall into this category.v) any smooth-bore revolver gun other than one which is chambered for 9mm rim- fire cartridges or a muzzle-loading gun (section 5(1)(ad));o Section 5(1)(ad) covers most smooth-bore revolver guns though an exception is made for the so-called ‘ratting guns’ chambered for 9mm rim-fire and for muzzle-loading guns, both of which are subject to control under section 1 of the Act. Section 57(2B) of the 1968 Act (as inserted by the Firearms (Amendment) Act 1988) defines a smooth-bore revolver gun as one containing a series of chambers, which revolve when the gun is fired. Examples of such guns are the ‘Dragon’ and the ‘Striker’.vi) any rocket launcher, or any mortar, for projecting a stabilised missile, other than a launcher or mortar designed for line-throwing or pyrotechnic purposes or as signaling apparatus (section 5(1)(ae));o A section 5(1)(ae) rocket launcher is effectively a tube designed to launch a rocket-propelled missile, whereas a mortar uses an explosive charge to launch a bomb. All modern rocket launchers and mortars are caught by this21
Guide on Firearms Licensing Lawsub-section. Antique or replica mortars (often used by historical re- enactment groups) are used to fire blanks or unstabilised projectiles, and are subject to control under section 1 or 2 of the 1968 Act, depending on the size of the bore and the length of the barrel.vii) any air rifle, air gun or air pistol that uses, or is designed or adapted for use with, a self-contained gas cartridge system (section 5(1)(af));o Section 5(1)(af) applies to air weapons that are designed, or adapted for use with self-contained gas cartridge (SCGC) systems, for example the Brocock system. This category does not include weapons that use a CO2 bulb system because CO2 bulbs do not contain a projectile and, therefore, are not self-contained.o Section 39(4) of the Anti-Social Behaviour Act 2003 makes provision for existing owners (i.e. those who possessed an SCGC weapon on 20 January 2004) to keep and continue to use their weapons, provided they were entered onto a firearm certificate. There is no provision in legislation for such weapons to be sold or transferred to other firearm holders. They may, however, be deactivated.o SCGC weapon owners wishing to surrender their weapons can do so to the police or a Registered Firearm Dealer (RFD) in possession of a Home Office approval for section 5(1)(af) weapons. Those RFDs with the relevant Home Office approval may also repair or deactivate such firearms.viii) any rifle with a chamber from which empty cartridge cases are extracted using:(i) energy from propellant gas, or (ii) energy imparted to a spring or other energy storage device by propellant gas, other than a rifle which is chambered for .22 rim-fire cartridges (section 5(1)(ag));o Section 5(1)(ag) applies to rifles such as the VZ 58 Manually Actuated Release System (MARS) rifle and the Southern Gun Company SGC lever release rifle. These rifles are considered more dangerous than other firearms because they can discharge rounds at a much faster rate than conventional bolt-action rifles which may be held on a firearm certificate.ix) any weapon of whatever description designed or adapted for the discharge of any noxious liquid, gas or other thing (section 5(1)(b));o The courts have held that stun guns are prohibited weapons under the terms of section 5(1)(b) of the 1968 Act (Flack v Baldry (1988) 1 All.ER 673). Anyone wishing to possess, purchase, acquire, manufacture, sell or transfer these and similar weapons, which give off an electrical discharge, must apply for the Secretary of State’s authority.o Cattle prods are not considered to be within this category because they are not designed or adapted as weapons. This section not only includes flamethrowers and poison gas projectors, but also personal protection sprays using CS, Mace or OC pepper.22
Guide on Firearms Licensing Lawo Additionally, it covers dart guns and blowpipes for shooting drugged or poisoned darts (but see section 8 of the 1997 Act which provides an exemption from the need for authority to possess such weapons provided they are held on a firearm certificate conditioned to allow their use for the tranquilising or otherwise treating of any animal).x) any device (commonly known as a bump stock) which is designed or adapted so that: (i) it is capable of forming part of or being added to a self-loading lethal barrelled weapon (as defined in section 57(1B) and (2A)), and (ii) if it forms part of or is added to such a weapon, it increases the rate of fire of the weapon by using the recoil from the weapon to generate repeated pressure on the trigger (section 5(1)(ba));o Section 5(1)(ba) covers bump stocks, which significantly increase the rate of fire of self-loading rifles.xi) any cartridge with a bullet designed to explode on or immediately before impact, any ammunition containing or designed or adapted to contain any such noxious thing as is mentioned in (ix) above and, if capable of being used with a firearm of any description, any grenade, bomb or other like missile, or rocket or shell designed to explode as aforesaid (section 5(1)(c));o Section 5(1)(c) includes cartridges containing explosive bullets and ammunition containing noxious substances such as CS. Explosive bullets are those containing an explosive charge, the purpose of which is to cause the bullet to explode on or immediately before impact with the target. Tracer bullets, which contain a chemical flaring compound designed so that the flight of the bullet can be seen, are not prohibited. Smoke canisters are not covered by this provision.xii) any firearm which is disguised as another object (section 5(1A)(a));o Section 5(1A)(a) was introduced primarily to control walking stick shot guns, but covers any firearm disguised as something else, for example, a pen pistol. A disguised firearm can also be a small firearm for the purposes of section 5(1)(aba). A firearm with camouflage applied for legitimate use, for example, by gamekeepers or wildfowlers, is not considered to be a disguised firearm for the purposes of the Act.xiii) 	any rocket or ammunition not falling within (xi) above which consists of, or incorporates, a missile designed to explode on or immediately before impact and is for military use (section 5(1A)(b));o Section 5(1A)(b) covers such things as air-to-air, air-to-ground or ground-to- air missiles that are fired from launch rails rather than through a tube. It also includes rocket grenades and torpedoes. It does not cover free-fall bombs, which are not considered to be ammunition.xiv) any launcher or other projecting apparatus not falling within (vi) above which is designed to be used with any rocket or ammunition falling within (xiii) above or with ammunition which would fall within that paragraph but for it being ammunition falling within (xi) above (section 5(1A)(c));23
Guide on Firearms Licensing Lawo Section 5(1A)(c) refers to such things as launch tubes fitted to fixed- or rotary- wing aircraft for category (xiii) missiles. Launch rails, which provide solely for carriage and release, are not considered to be launchers unless they also provide the initial guidance for the missile.xv) any ammunition for military use which consists of, or incorporates, a missile designed so that a substance contained in the missile will ignite on or immediately before impact (section 5(1A)(d));o Section 5(1A)(d) refers to ammunition designed to have an incendiary effect at the target. This includes missiles containing napalm and similar substances. It does not include tracer rounds.xvi) any ammunition for military use which consists of or incorporates a missile designed, on account of its having a jacket and hard-core, to penetrate armour plating, armour screening or body armour (section 5(1A)(e));o Section 5(1A)(e) is typified by tungsten-cored rounds designed to penetrate armour using kinetic energy alone. It extends to depleted uranium rounds and armour piercing discarding sabot ammunition.xvii) any ammunition which is designed to be used with a pistol and incorporates a missile designed or adapted to expand on impact (section 5(1A)(f));o Section 5(1A)(f) refers to ammunition incorporating a projectile that is designed or adapted to expand in a controlled manner. Semi-jacketed soft point and hollow point are typical forms of expanding ammunition, but care must be taken to distinguish between expanding ammunition which is solely designed for use in pistols and expanding ammunition for use in rifles - only expanding ammunition for pistols is prohibited, whereas expanding ammunition for rifles is subject to section 1 controls and may be held on a firearms certificate. All bullets will distort on impact, but only those which were designed or adapted to do so in a predictable manner fit this category.xviii) anything which is designed to be projected as a missile from any weapon and is designed to be, or has been incorporated in, any ammunition falling within any of the preceding paragraphs (see xv, xvi and xvii above); or any ammunition which would fall within any of those paragraphs but for it being specified at (xi) above (section 5(1A)(g));o Section 5(1A)(g) extends the prohibition on the various types of prohibited ammunition to the actual bullet or missile itself, not just the complete round of ammunition (a complete round consists of the bullet, the cartridge case, the propellant and the primer).Component parts3.4 Note that the component parts of weapons falling under 5(1)(a), 5(1A)(a) or 5(1)(aba) are also subject to section 5 controls (see also Chapter 12).3.5 Section 57(1D) of the 1968 Act defines the relevant component parts of weapons as: a barrel, chamber or cylinder; a frame, body or receiver; a breech block, bolt or24
Guide on Firearms Licensing Lawother mechanism for containing the pressure of discharge at the rear of a chamber; but only where the item is capable of being used as a part of a lethal barrelled weapon or a prohibited weapon.Adding to the list of prohibited weapons3.6 Section 1(4) of the Firearms (Amendment) Act 1988 enables the Secretary of State, subject to the approval of Parliament, to make an Order adding to the list of prohibited weapons and ammunition. This power applies only in respect of:a) any firearm (not being an air weapon) which is not for the time being specified in subsection (1) of section 5 of the 1968 Act, was not lawfully on sale in Great Britain in substantial numbers at any time before 1988 and appears to the Secretary of State to be:i) specially dangerous (see Chapter 2); orii) wholly or partly composed of material making it not readily detectable by apparatus used for detecting metal objects;b) any ammunition which is not for the time being specified in that subsection but appears to the Secretary of State to be specially dangerous; orc) any air rifle, air gun or air pistol which is not for the time being specified in that subsection but appears to the Secretary of State to be specially dangerous.3D Printed firearms3.7 The manufacture, purchase, sale and possession of 3D printed firearms, ammunition or their component parts is fully captured by the provisions in section 57(1) of the Firearms Act 1968. The definition of firearm in the Act includes any component parts. 3D printed firearms are subject to strict control in the following respects:a. under section 1 of the 1968 Act, it is an offence for an individual to possess, purchase or acquire any component part of a firearm without a certificate;b. under section 3 of the 1968 Act, it is an offence for a person who is not a registered firearms dealer or their servant to manufacture or possess for sale, by way of trade or business, a component part of a firearm; andc. under section 5 of the 1968 Act, it is an offence for a person to possess, purchase, acquire, manufacture, sell, transfer, possess for sale or transfer, or purchase or acquire for sale or transfer, a component part of a prohibited weapon without the authority of the Secretary of State or of the Scottish Ministers in Scotland.25
Guide on Firearms Licensing LawAuthorities under section 5 of the 1968 Act3.8 This section sets out the arrangements under which the Secretary of State considers applications for authority to possess etc prohibited weapons and ammunition under section 5 of the Firearms Act 1968.In England and Wales, applications for authority to possess, purchase, acquire, manufacture, sell, transfer, possess for sale or transfer, or purchase or acquire for sale or transfer prohibited weapons or ammunition are determined by the Home Office.In Scotland, the Scottish Ministers are the responsible body. Applications are determined by the Scottish Government:Firearms TeamSafer Communities Division St Andrew’s House EdinburghEH1 3DGSee the gov.scot website for the Scottish Government section 5 application form. email: firearms.enquiries@gov.scotTelephone: 0131 244 8525Application for a section 5 authority in England and Wales3.9 In England and Wales, applications must be made to the Home Office electronically using the designated application portal. For detailed advice on how to apply, please consult the Home Office Guidance for the application for a section 5 authority for prohibited weapons and ammunition.3.10 References in the remainder of the guide to the Home Office should also be taken to mean the Scottish Government unless otherwise stated. Exemptions from the requirement to obtain the Secretary of State’s authority to possess prohibited items are set out in paragraphs 3.18 to 3.23.3.11 Before a decision is made concerning a particular application for an authority, the chief officer of police in the area from which the application has been received will be asked if they have any objections to the grant of the authority. If an authority is granted, it will be sent to the applicant and copied to the chief officer. As a matter of policy, the Secretary of State will normally only grant authorities for those with a legitimate commercial need to possess prohibited weapons, rather than for private use or speculative business interest. The chief officer will be informed of any case in which an authority is refused or revoked.3.12 The Secretary of State is responsible for granting authority, but will rely on information from, and the opinion of, the chief officer of police when reaching a decision. Prohibited weapons are subject to a more stringent control than other firearms and authority to possess or deal in such weapons is granted only if good reason is shown. The authority may restrict the holder to a particular category of prohibited weapon or prohibited ammunition and specify the range of transactions, which may be undertaken. Chief officers should report any circumstances that might justify revoking an authority to the Home Office or the Scottish Government.26
Guide on Firearms Licensing Law3.13 When an application for renewal of an authority is received, the Home Office or the Scottish Government will again seek the views of the police. It is essential, therefore, that applications for renewal are made well in advance of the expiry date.3.14 Prohibited weapons and ammunition are included in the definitions of ‘firearm’ and ‘ammunition’ in section 57 of the 1968 Act and are therefore subject to the restrictions applicable to other types of firearm and ammunition. No firearm certificate should be granted in respect of any weapon or ammunition to which section 5 of the 1968 Act applies unless authority for its possession has been given by the Secretary of State or they are exempt. If any person applies for a certificate for a prohibited weapon or ammunition already in their possession where they are neither exempt nor able to produce the original, valid authority from the Secretary of State, the application should be refused and the individual required to surrender the weapon or ammunition immediately.3.15 Where a person has been authorised by the Secretary of State to have possession of a prohibited weapon or prohibited ammunition, the chief officer of police has no discretion to refuse or to revoke the necessary firearm certificate in respect of the prohibited weapon or ammunition (section 31(1) of the 1968 Act). In the case of dealers authorised to manufacture, sell or transfer prohibited weapons, there is no discretion to refuse to enter their names in, or to remove them from, the register of dealers (sections 34(3) and 38(2) of the 1968 Act). When an authority is revoked, any firearm certificate relating to the weapon or ammunition in question must be revoked or varied accordingly (section 31(2) of the 1968 Act). The Secretary of State will consider revoking, or varying the conditions of, any authority if the chief officer thinks it necessary. If such a case should arise, a full report should be made to the Home Office or the Scottish Government (as applicable) as soon as possible.3.16 Under section 12(2) of the 1968 Act (as amended) (a parallel provision to Section 12(1) of the 1968 Act), an authority to possess prohibited weapons issued to a theatrical or cinematograph film producer may authorise the possession of the weapons by such other persons as the producer may select to have possession thereof whilst taking part in the performance, rehearsal or production.3.17 Section 5(4) of the 1968 Act provides that an authority shall contain conditions for the purpose of ensuring that the prohibited weapon or prohibited ammunition will not endanger the public safety or the peace. Conditions are stipulated by the Home Office or the Scottish Ministers (and these will vary in individual cases) although the opinion of the chief officer is also sought. Section 5(5) of the 1968 Act makes it an offence to fail to comply with any conditions subject to which an authority is granted. Under section 5(6) of the 1968 Act it is an offence, upon revocation, to fail to deliver up an authority to such person as may be specified in the notice within 21 days of the date of the notice of revocation.Exemptions from the requirement to hold the Secretary of State’s authority to possess prohibited items3.18 Under the terms of section 54 of the 1968 Act (as amended) persons in the service of His Majesty acting in their capacity as such are exempt from the provisions of section 5 of the Act. For the purposes of the Act, persons deemed to be in the service of His Majesty include members of a police force, civilian officers, members27
Guide on Firearms Licensing Lawof any foreign force when serving with British forces, members of any approved cadet corps when engaged as members of the corps in drill, or in target practice on service premises, and persons providing instruction to members of a cadet corps.3.19 Since the 1968 Act created section 5, it has been significantly amended by section 1 of the Firearms (Amendment) Act 1988, regulation 3 of the Firearms Acts (Amendment) Regulations 1992 and sections 1, 9 and 52 of the 1997 Act, Schedule 3 of the 1997 Act, section 39 of the Anti-social Behaviour Act 2003, the Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014, the Policing and Crime Act 2017 and, the Offensive Weapons Act 2019. In addition, sections 2 to 7 of the 1997 Act provide for certain special exemptions from the prohibition of small firearms. It is therefore critical that all revisions are taken account of when dealing with section 5 issues.3.20 Section 5A(1) of the 1968 Act refers to collectors and states that the authority of the Secretary of State is not required for a collector to possess, purchase, acquire, sell or transfer any of the firearms or ammunition listed in section 5(1A) provided they have a suitably conditioned, valid firearm certificate or permit. The weapons and ammunition listed under section 5(1A) are those in categories (xii) to (xviii) above.3.21 Section 5A(4) of the 1968 Act states that the Secretary of State’s authority is not required for shooters to possess, purchase or acquire, or sell or transfer expanding ammunition or expanding bullets prohibited by sections 5(1A)(f) and (g) providing they have a firearm certificate or visitors’ permit authorising their use in connection with four specific activities. These activities are:i. the lawful shooting of deer;ii. shooting of vermin or, in the course of estate management, other wildlife (for more information see Chapter 12);iii. the humane killing of animals; andiv. the shooting of animals to protect other animals or people.This exemption applies to expanding ammunition which is designed to be used with a pistol (see Chapter 4 for further information on expanding ammunition).3.22 There is no need for the expanding pistol bullets to be listed separately on the certificate. However, where a certificate holder requests large quantities of bullets, it should be remembered that the total number of expanding bullets authorised counts towards their overall limit on possession of expanding pistol ammunition. The exception to the rule on listing bullets separately on a firearm certificate applies in the case of a certificate holder who wishes to possess a variety of different types of bullets. This may be reflected in a relatively higher overall limit on possession and, in these circumstances, the bullets should be listed separately to help avoid unnecessary stockpiling of complete rounds. The dealer making the sale must record transactions of expanding pistol ammunition and bullets for such ammunition on the buyer’s certificate and the sale must also be recorded in the dealer’s register. Provisions for registered firearms dealers are outlined in Chapter 4.3.23 Section 5A(5) of the 1968 Act allows licensed slaughtermen to have, without the authority of the Secretary of State or the Scottish Ministers, expanding pistol ammunition for use in a slaughtering instrument, defined at section 57(4) of the 1968 Act as being a firearm specially designed or adapted for the instantaneous slaughter of animals or for the instantaneous stunning of animals with a view to slaughtering28
Guide on Firearms Licensing Lawthem. Section 10 of the 1968 Act allows licensed slaughtermen, without the need for a firearm certificate, to have a slaughtering instrument and ammunition for it in any slaughterhouse or knacker’s yard in which they are employed. In addition, section 2 of the 1997 Act allows other people to possess a slaughtering instrument if they have a firearm certificate allowing possession of the weapon. This provision is meant to apply to those people such as vets, hunt servants and other suitably qualified individuals who could reasonably be expected in the course of their normal work to have to destroy sick or injured animals.29
Guide on Firearms Licensing LawChapter 4: Expanding Ammunition4.1 This chapter sets out the definition of expanding ammunition and the controls and prohibitions on its possession, purchase, acquisition, sale and transfer.Definitions4.2 Section 5(1A)(f) of the Firearms Act 1968 prohibits “any ammunition which is designed to be used with a pistol and incorporates a missile designed or adapted to expand on impact”. Section 5(1A)(g) prohibits the bullets for such ammunition (missiles, in the words of the Act). The words ‘designed or adapted’ are important. Any bullet will deform on impact with a sufficiently hard surface, but only bullets, and ammunition containing bullets, which were designed or have been adapted to do so in a controlled manner are actually controlled by the legislation (see Chapter 3). If in doubt as to the design intention of a bullet, reference to the maker’s design specification should be made. Frangible bullets, do not fall under section 5(1A)(f) of the 1968 Act.4.3 The prohibition in section 5(1A)(f) previously also applied to expanding ammunition for rifles. However, this was changed by section 129 of the Policing and Crime Act 2017. As a result, expanding ammunition which can be used in a rifle is no longer prohibited and may be possessed on a firearm certificate. The prohibition on expanding ammunition which can only be used in a pistol remains.Exemptions4.4 Section 5A(4) of the 1968 Act provides an exemption from the prohibition of expanding ammunition for pistols which is to be used in connection with any one or more of the following purposes:i. lawful shooting of deer;ii. shooting of vermin or, in the course of estate management, other wildlife (for more information see Chapter 12);iii. humane killing of animals; andiv. shooting animals for the protection of other animals or humans.4.5 Persons who wish to acquire expanding ammunition for any of these purposes must first satisfy the chief officer of police that they have a ‘good reason’ to possess a pistol for any of the above. Once this ‘good reason’ requirement has been satisfied, the shooter’s firearm certificate or visitor’s permit must be conditioned to include expanding ammunition and, for home loaders, the bullets for such ammunition. The condition should restrict the use of the bullets or ammunition to the precise purpose for which it is intended (see also Chapter 3). These exemptions apply only to use in England, Wales and Scotland, as Northern Ireland has its own legislation.4.6 Section 5A(7) of the 1968 Act exempts dealers and their servants from the need for the authority of the Secretary of State or Scottish Ministers to possess, purchase,30
Guide on Firearms Licensing Lawacquire, sell or transfer any expanding ammunition for pistols, or the missile for any such ammunition, in the ordinary course of the business. Dealers may not possess any expanding ammunition for pistols for their private use unless they have a suitably conditioned firearm certificate.31
Guide on Firearms Licensing LawChapter 5: Restrictions on the Possession, Handling and Distribution of Firearms and Ammunition5.1 This chapter sets out some of the general requirements and prohibitions of the law on possession, purchase and acquisition of firearms and ammunition. It should be noted that additional information on many of these areas can be found in other parts of the guide.Definitions5.2 Under sections 1 and 2 of the 1968 Act, it is an offence for a person “to have in their possession or to purchase or acquire” a firearm or ammunition to which section 1 applies or a shot gun (but not shot gun cartridges) without holding the appropriate certificate. The case law suggests that possession is an absolute offence. It is not a valid defence that the defendant does not know that a bag in their possession contains a firearm (R v Steele 1993) or that a supposedly antique firearm is subject to certification (R v Howells 1997). Possession may be constructive (that is, having free access to the firearms rather than physically possessing them) (Sullivan v Earl of Caithness 1976).5.3 In some (very restricted) circumstances certain categories of people may be authorised by the Act to “have in their possession” firearms and/or ammunition without a certificate, but not to purchase or acquire. Such people might include licensed slaughterers, a person taking part in theatrical, television or film productions, warehouse operatives or carriers (see Chapter 6) and those authorised under section 7 of the Firearms Act 1968. See also Chapter 6 and Chapter 24, about firearms that may have been found amongst the property of somebody who has died. Chapter 6 also includes details of other exemptions from the need to have a certificate, including the use of borrowed rifles on private premises, as does Chapter 17 on clubs. See also chapters 14 and 26.5.4 The word “sell” is often used throughout the Act in conjunction with the word “transfer”. Transfer is defined in section 57(4) of the 1968 Act as including letting on hire, giving, lending and parting with possession.General prohibitions5.5 Persons prohibited under section 21 of the 1968 Act may not possess any firearms or ammunition, not just those for which a certificate is required. Thus the prohibition extends to all air weapons, air gun pellets and shot gun ammunition. It should also be noted that:(a) The prohibition applies to persons sentenced in all parts of the United Kingdom, including those sentenced in Northern Ireland. Section 29 of the32
Guide on Firearms Licensing LawCriminal Justice Act 1972 amended section 21 of the 1968 Act. In its unamended form, section 21 applied the prohibition only to those sentenced in England, Wales and Scotland; the amendment in section 29 of the Criminal Justice Act 1972 made the similar prohibition on possessing firearms and ammunition in Northern Ireland (previously section 19 of the Firearms Act (Northern Ireland) 1969, now Article 63 of the Firearms (Northern Ireland) Order 2004) effective in England, Wales and Scotland.(b) The prohibition includes detention in a young offenders institution, or in youth custody. Paragraph 24 of Schedule 14 to the Criminal Justice Act 1982 added the words “or to youth custody for such a term” to subsections(1) (after “three years or more”) and (2) (after “less than three years”) of section 21 of the 1968 Act. Paragraph 6 of Schedule 8 to the Criminal Justice Act 1988 amended section 21(1) and (2) of the 1968 Act by inserting “or detention in a young offenders institution” after “youth custody”.5.6 Convictions overseas and periods of detention under the Mental Health Act or the Mental Health (Care and Treatment) Scotland Act 2003 do not count towards prohibition, although they might be relevant to fitness and public safety.5.7 A court in England and Wales that imposes a suspended sentence may order the forfeiture of a firearm or cancel a firearm or shot gun certificate. Even if a court does not make such an order, chief officers of police have the power to revoke a firearm or shot gun certificate in certain circumstances. The fact that an order has been made under section 52 of the 1968 Act in respect of the applicant (notwithstanding that only a suspended sentence was passed) might also be regarded by chief officers as giving them reason to believe that the applicant is unfit to be entrusted or to possess a firearm or shot gun without danger to the public safety or to the peace.5.8 Since 14 July 2014 suspended sentences have attracted the prohibition imposed by section 21 of the 1968 Act. Section 110 of the Anti-social Behaviour Crime and Policing Act 2014 extended the definition of a prohibited person to include persons with suspended sentences of three months or more.The period of prohibition of five years begins on the second day after the date on which sentence has been passed so that a person who is in possession of a firearm or ammunition is not in immediate breach of the law when the sentence is passed. This timescale therefore provides an opportunity for a person to make arrangements to transfer or dispose of their firearm or ammunition.5.9 Since 14 July 2014 persons prohibited from possessing firearms under section 21 (including those with suspended sentences) are also unable to possess antique firearms (see Chapter 8).5.10 A person who has served a custodial sentence is informed of the provisions of section 21 of the 1968 Act on release. Section 21(6) of the 1968 Act enables a person who is prohibited by the provisions of the section to apply to the Crown Court (or the Sheriff in Scotland) in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 3 to the 1968 Act for the removal of the prohibition. This is usually done where the offence has not involved violence or firearms. Nevertheless, the removal of the prohibition can be opposed by the police and courts have ruled that possession of33
Guide on Firearms Licensing Lawa firearm certificate presupposed an element of trust (Gordon v Northampton Crown Court 1999).5.11 Under section 25 of the 1968 Act it is an offence for a person to sell or transfer a firearm or ammunition to, or to repair, prove or test any firearm or ammunition for another person whom they know, or have reasonable cause to believe, to be drunk or of unsound mind.5.12 Restrictions on the possession, purchase and acquisition of firearms and ammunition by young people and on the sale and transfer to them are dealt with separately in Chapter 7.Firearms and ammunition for which a certificate is required5.13 Any person wishing to possess, purchase or acquire any firearm or ammunition must hold a valid firearm or shot gun certificate (as appropriate) unless exempt under sections 7 to 13, 15, 54 or 58(1) of the 1968 Act or sections 15 to 19 of the Firearms (Amendment) Act 1988, except:a) an air weapon or a weapon powered by compressed carbon dioxide (not of a type declared by the Secretary of State under the Dangerous Air Weapons Rules 1969 (as amended) to be specially dangerous);b) ammunition for air weapons;c) cartridges containing five or more shot, none of which exceeds .36 inches in diameter (the exemption does not extend to the purchase of such ammunition);d) blank cartridges not more than one inch in diameter.5.14 Section 5 of the 1988 Act prohibits the sale of ammunition for a shot gun or smoothbore gun, and for which a firearm certificate is not required, to a person who is neither a registered firearms dealer nor a person who sells such ammunition by way of trade or business unless that person:a) produces a shot gun certificate or a firearm certificate (the original, not a photocopy) authorising them to possess a smooth-bore gun;b) shows that they are entitled to possess a shot gun or smooth-bore gun without holding a certificate; orc) produces a certificate (the original, not a photocopy) of some other person together with a written authority from the holder of the certificate to purchase the ammunition on their behalf.This section only applies to ammunition not subject to control under section 1 of the 1968 Act. There is no requirement for a vendor of shot gun cartridges to be registered as a firearms dealer.5.15 Unless exempt, a special authority from the Secretary of State or the Scottish Ministers is needed in addition to a firearm certificate for the possession of a prohibited weapon or prohibited ammunition (see Chapter 3).34
Primers
Guide on Firearms Licensing Law
5.16 The Violent Crime Reduction Act 2006 introduced controls on the purchase and sale of cap-type primers designed for use in metallic ammunition for a firearm, including empty cartridge cases incorporating such a primer. Section 35 of the 2006 Act makes it an offence to sell these items unless the purchaser:a) is a registered dealer;b) sells by way of any trade or business either primers or empty cartridge cases incorporating primers;c) produces a certificate (the original, not a photocopy) authorising them to possess a firearm of a relevant kind (i.e. a firearm other than a shot gun, an air weapon or a firearm chambered for rim-fire ammunition) or ammunition for such a firearm;d) is a duly authorised Crown servant;e) shows that they are entitled in law to possess a firearm or ammunition of a relevant kind without a certificate;f) produces a certificate (the original, not a photocopy) authorising another person to possess such a firearm, or such ammunition, together with that other person’s authority to purchase primers on their behalf; org) shows that they are authorised by regulations to purchase primers. To date no such regulations have been made.Section 35 also makes it an offence to buy, or attempt to buy, primers unless the purchaser meets the same criteria.The definitions used in section 35 mean that the offences do not apply to the purchase or sale of blank ammunition, shot gun primers or to percussion caps for muzzle-loading firearms.Business and other transactions5.17 A person commits an offence, if by way of trade or business that person is engaged in the manufacture, sale or transfer of shot guns or firearms or ammunition to which section 1 of the 1968 Act applies and is not registered as a firearms dealer. This requirement extends to persons who repair, test or prove such firearms or ammunition. A person also commits an offence if they expose for sale or transfer or have in their possession for sale, transfer, repair, test, or proof any such firearm or ammunition, or a shot gun.In relation to air weapons; a person commits an offence if, by way of trade or business, they sell or transfer, expose for sale or transfer; or possess for sale or transfer air weapons without being registered as a firearms dealer (see Chapter 15).35
Guide on Firearms Licensing Law5.18 Persons who dispose of firearms or ammunition otherwise than by way of trade and business need not register, but all persons, including dealers, must observe the provisions of the Act regarding:a) persons to whom firearms and ammunition may be sold or transferred (section 3(2) of the 1968 Act and section 5(2) of the Firearms (Amendment) Act 1988) namely;1) a person producing a firearm certificate authorising them to acquire that firearm or section 1 ammunition;2) a registered firearms dealer;3) in the case of a shot gun, a person with a current shot gun certificate or a firearm certificate holder who possesses a section 1 shot gun;4) in the case of section 2 (shot gun) ammunition, someone who produces another person’s valid shot gun certificate, together with written authority from the certificate holder to allow them to purchase or acquire the ammunition;5) someone who shows that by virtue of the Act they are entitled to purchase or acquire the firearm or ammunition without a certificate.b) instructions in firearm and shot gun certificates and notification to the chief officer of police of the sale etc. of a firearm or shot gun to a person who is neither a firearms dealer nor otherwise exempt from holding a certificate (section 32(2)(b), 33(2) and (3) of the 1997 Act).Though not a statutory requirement, it is desirable that police forces should also comply with these requirements if they transfer a firearm or shot gun to a certificate holder from another force area, completing Table 1 on a firearm certificate and/or Table 2 on a shot gun certificate.5.19 Section 33 of the 1997 Act requires that, within seven days of the transaction, the transferor and transferee must send, electronically (for example, by email or fax) or by recorded or special delivery, notification to the chief officers of police who issued their own certificates. The transferor is the person who originally possessed the gun, and the transferee is the recipient (and it is the transferor who must write the details of the gun and its transfer onto the certificate of the transferee). The notice of the transaction must contain a description of the firearm or shot gun (including any identification number), state the nature of the transaction and give the name and address of the other person concerned. A firearm or shot gun placed with a registered firearms dealer or auctioneer for sale or return is not regarded as a transfer. Notification is only required once the transfer is complete when all three parties notify the police. As the transferor may not know the name of the ultimate transferee, it is sufficient for the transferor only to notify the police of disposal to the dealer or auctioneer.5.20 Section 34 of the 1997 Act requires that, on the deactivation, destruction or loss of any firearm to which a firearm or shot gun certificate or a visitor’s firearm or shot gun permit relates, the chief officer of police who granted the certificate or permit must be notified within seven days of the event. The notification must be sent36
Guide on Firearms Licensing Lawelectronically (for example, by email or fax) or by recorded or special delivery and must describe the firearm in question (including any identification number) and the nature of the event. Similarly, if any ammunition to which section 1 of the 1968 Act applies and a firearm certificate or visitor’s permit relates is lost (whether by theft or otherwise), the chief officer who granted the certificate or permit must be notified within seven days by recorded or special delivery. The actual methods of destruction of firearms are not covered by legislation but to provide adequate safeguards it is generally more appropriate for certificate holders to surrender it either to a registered firearms dealer or to the police rather than to destroy it themselves (see Chapter 24 for further information).5.21 Section 35 of the 1997 Act requires that if a firearm or shot gun is sold or otherwise disposed of outside Great Britain by a person whose acquisition or purchase of the firearm or shot gun was authorised by a firearm certificate or shot gun certificate, the person holding the certificate must notify the chief officer of police within fourteen days by electronic notification (for example, by email or fax) or recorded or special delivery, or, if they are abroad, by the nearest available equivalent. The notification must contain a description of the firearm or shot gun (including any identification number) and the name and address of the person to whom the gun was sold or disposed of.5.22 Section 35 of the 1997 Act requires that if a firearm to which a firearm or shot gun certificate relates is deactivated, destroyed or lost (whether by theft or otherwise) or if any ammunition to which section 1 of the 1968 Act applies is lost outside Great Britain, the chief officer of police who issued the certificate must be notified within fourteen days. The notice must contain the same information as the notice of sale or disposal and be sent electronically (for example, by email or fax) or by recorded or special delivery.5.23 A firearms dealer is also required to send a notification of a transaction involving a visitor under section 18(1) of the Firearms (Amendment) Act 1988 to the chief officer of police for the area in which they are registered. The notice must be sent within forty-eight hours of the transaction, electronically (for example, by email or fax) or by recorded or special delivery, and contain all the particulars entered in the register of transactions including the details of the purchaser’s passport, if any.5.24 Section 8(2)(a) of the 1968 Act also provides specifically that it is not an offence to part with possession, otherwise than by sale, hire, gift or loan, to a person who is entitled to possess the firearm or ammunition without a certificate.5.25 Further exemptions from the need to produce a certificate are made for persons collecting a shot gun from a dealer who has had it for repair, test or proof (section 8(2)(b) of the 1968 Act). It would be good practice for the dealer and persons to whom carriers or warehousemen or their servants are delivering a firearm or ammunition in the ordinary course of business to ask to see a certificate (section 9(4) of the 1968 Act) or proof that the person collecting the shot gun is entitled to possess it without a certificate.37
Guide on Firearms Licensing LawPawnbrokers5.26 Whilst section 3(6) of the 1968 Act prohibits pawnbrokers from taking in pawn any firearm or ammunition to which section 1 of the 1968 Act applies, or any shot gun, a pawnbroker is not debarred from registration as a firearms dealer. In these circumstances, the police will wish to consider an application under the same terms as any other dealer.Sales of firearms unproven or out of proof5.27 The provisions of the Gun Barrel Proof Acts are explained in Chapter 23.Records of transactions5.28 Persons who by way of trade or business manufacture, sell or transfer firearms or ammunition to which section 1 of the 1968 Act applies, shot guns, or air weapons, are required by section 40 of the 1968 Act to keep a register of transactions and to enter in it the particulars specified in Schedule 4 to the Act and Part 4 of Schedule 5 to the Firearms Rules 1998 (firearms dealer’s register of transactions) (as amended by the Firearms (Amendment) (No.2) Rules 2019). The Act does not specifically require a registered dealer to be satisfied before purchasing a firearm to which section 1 applies, or a shot gun, that the vendor is in possession of a certificate for that firearm, but the dealer is required to record the transaction in the register.5.29 It is good practice for firearms dealers to notify their local police where they take in firearms, including shot guns, which are not held lawfully on a firearm or shot gun certificate. This will enable the police to make checks to ensure they are not recorded as lost or stolen.5.30 Section 18(1) of the 1988 Act allows a visitor who has not been in Great Britain for more than thirty days in the preceding twelve months to purchase a firearm from a firearms dealer for the purpose only of it being exported without first coming into their possession without the need for a certificate. A firearms dealer is required to record the transaction in their register together with the number and place of issue of any passport in the purchaser’s possession. A passport will normally provide evidence for a firearms dealer that a visitor satisfies the thirty day criterion. Section 40(7) of the 1968 Act empowers the Secretary of State to make rules varying or adding to Schedule 4 of the 1968 Act. Such changes were made by Rule 10(5) of the Firearms Rules 1998 and by the Firearms (Amendment) Rules 2007.5.31 Section 38(8) of the 1968 Act provides for the surrender of a dealer’s register (or, if the register is kept electronically, a visible and legible copy of the information) and certificate of registration if their name is removed from the register of firearms dealers. It is an offence for the dealer not to comply within twenty-one days of a notice in writing requiring them to surrender the register.38
Guide on Firearms Licensing LawInspection of dealers’ records5.32 Persons who by way of trade or business manufacture, sell or transfer firearms or ammunition to which section 1 of the 1968 Act applies, shot guns, or air weapons, are required by section 40(4) of the 1968 Act to allow any police officer (including civilian officers) duly authorised in writing by the chief officer of police to enter their premises and inspect all stock in hand and the register of transactions. In all cases, the inspecting officer must produce such written authority on demand. Form 122 is a convenient form of authorisation for this purpose. Under section 40(3A) of the 1968 Act, dealers are required to keep their register of transactions so that entries made in the register are available for inspection for a period of at least five years. If the register is kept on computer, dealers must ensure that a copy of the information contained therein can be produced in a visible and legible form which can be taken away by the inspecting officer. The register should include firearms taken in for repair or storage, although these are not regarded as transfers and consequently notification to the police is not required.5.33 Section 41 of the 1968 Act enables chief officers of police, at their discretion, to exempt from all or any of the provisions about keeping records persons who manufacture, test or repair components for manufacturers of shot guns but do not handle complete shot guns. Chief officers should satisfy themselves as to the facts in each case, including the type of work carried on and the extent of the danger that each situation presents as a possible source of firearms for criminals. Each case should be reviewed at regular intervals.39
Guide on Firearms Licensing LawChapter 6: Exemptions from the requirement to hold a certificate6.1 The exemptions in the Acts apply to a particular category of person and exempt them so far as firearms are held, purchased or acquired for some particular and specified purpose. The exemptions may be divided into two groups; those that concern possession and purchase and acquisition, and those that concern only possession. The exemptions are dealt with in this way in the following two sections of this chapter.Possession and purchase or acquisition of any type of firearm or ammunition without a certificateFirearms dealers and their servants6.2 The exemption in section 8(1) of the 1968 Act covers the possession, purchase and acquisition of firearms and ammunition in the ordinary course of the dealer’s business. It extends to dealers and their servants. There is no legal definition of a “servant”, but it should be noted that a letter of authority does not automatically make someone a “servant” for these purposes. An employee of the dealer working for a firearms-related business would be a “servant,” but it is not the case that anyone whose services the dealer uses on any occasion will necessarily be a servant e.g. a self-employed outworker (such as an engraver). In these circumstances the outworker would be required to register as a firearms dealer. The possession of the firearms and ammunition by a servant may only be for the ordinary business of the dealer as directed by the RFD holder.6.3 A registered firearms dealer must have a firearm certificate or shot gun certificate as appropriate for any gun they possess for uses unconnected with their dealership. Under section 3(3) of the 1968 Act, a person is prohibited from undertaking the repair, test or proof of a firearm or ammunition to which section 1 of the 1968 Act applies, or of a shot gun, unless the person seeking the repair or other work produces a certificate authorising their possession of the firearm or ammunition, or the shot gun, or alternatively shows that they are entitled to have it without a certificate.Miniature rifle ranges6.4 Under section 11(4) of the 1968 Act, a person conducting or carrying on a miniature rifle range (whether for a rifle club or otherwise), or shooting gallery at which only miniature rifles not exceeding .23 inch calibre or air weapons not declared by the Secretary of State to be specially dangerous are used, may, without holding a firearm certificate, purchase, acquire or have in their possession such miniature rifles and suitable ammunition. Persons using the range are exempt from holding a firearm certificate in respect only of the use of such miniature rifles and ammunition at the range or gallery.40
Guide on Firearms Licensing Law6.5 Any further exemption in the case of a club can only be secured by obtaining approval from the Secretary of State (see Chapter 17). It should be noted that “Exemption Certificates” issued by the Showman’s Guild or the National Small-bore Rifle Association have no legal force but can be considered proof that somebody was operating a miniature rifle range or shooting gallery. There is however no obligation on the operator of the range or gallery to produce any form of documentation, and the police would only be justified in taking action against such an operator where they are not meeting the terms of section 11(4).Persons in the service of the Crown and police6.6 Section 54 of the 1968 Act is a general provision relating to all Crown servants and to persons who are members of a police force or civilian officers (police staff employed by, or under the direction and control of, a chief officer of police). The Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 gives the British Transport Police the same general provisions as specified within section 54 of the 1968 Act.6.7 The effect of the section is that Crown servants, and police officers and staff who possess firearms and ammunition in their official capacity do not require firearm certificates or authority of the Secretary of State to possess prohibited weapons. In addition, Customs Officers do not require written authority to detain, seize or otherwise possess firearms they encounter in carrying out their official duties. This is because statute law does not bind the Crown or its servants unless specifically stated in the Act of Parliament concerned. Thus soldiers would be exempt if they possess a service firearm in, or for the purpose of, the performance of their duty, but not if they possess other firearms for other purposes, for example if they possess a rifle or shot gun for their own private purposes.6.8 In general, Crown servants who are required to possess firearms and ammunition in the performance of their official duties are supplied with the weapons and ammunition by the departments they serve. Accordingly, the section does not empower Crown servants to purchase or acquire firearms or ammunition to which section 1 of the 1968 Act applies, or shot guns, without a certificate, except as provided in subsection 2(a) of section 54 of the 1968 Act. This provision enables a person in the service of His Majesty who has written authority from a senior officer, to purchase or acquire firearms and ammunition for the public service without holding a certificate and is intended to cover the necessary purchases by government departments such as the contract branches of the Ministry of Defence.6.9 There may also be cases in which a department may issue an authority under the subsection to enable emergency purchases to be made by its officers for their use in the public service (see Chapter 19 on the grant of free certificates to persons in the armed services to authorise purchase). Forestry Commission employees are Crown servants and those concerned with wildlife management operate under the general provision of section 54 of the 1968 Act. Copies of their policy on who is authorised to hold firearms and ammunition are available to chief officers of police from the Forestry Commission (for England), Forestry and Land Scotland, and Natural Resources Wales.6.10 The question of whether a firearm, in the possession of a Crown servant, is in their possession in their capacity as such can be authoritatively determined only by a41
Guide on Firearms Licensing Lawcourt, but when in doubt the department or the commanding officer of the person concerned should be consulted before proceedings are instituted; otherwise the facts should be reported to the department or the commanding officer in order that the need for disciplinary action may be considered.6.11 Members of the reserve forces may, in certain circumstances, be persons in the service of His Majesty who are entitled to possess firearms and ammunition in their capacity as such and are therefore Crown servants for the purposes of section 54 of the 1968 Act. Whether or not such personnel are entitled to exemption from section 1 of the 1968 Act will depend on such matters as whether they have been called out for service and the terms under which they undertake service. If any person claims that on this basis they are entitled to possess a firearm or ammunition without a firearm certificate the department or the commanding officer of the person concerned should be consulted before proceedings are instituted. However, if such a person wishes to acquire a firearm or ammunition for private use, they should obtain a firearm certificate for the purpose, in which case the appropriate fee would be payable.Visiting Forces6.12 The Visiting Forces and International Headquarters (Application of Law) Order 1999 (SI 1999/1736), made under section 8 of the Visiting Forces Act 1952, extends to visiting NATO and Commonwealth forces the exemptions covering His Majesty's forces. Furthermore, members of any foreign force when they are serving with any of His Majesty’s forces are regarded as Crown servants for the purposes of section 54 of the 1968 Act.Cadet Corps6.13 Members of cadet corps and their instructors are regarded as Crown servants in certain circumstances (see Chapter 17).Museums6.14 Section 19 of the Firearms (Amendment) Act 1988 and its Schedule provide for the exemption of certain museums from the provisions of the 1968 Act if they hold a museum firearms licence (see Chapter 16).Visitors to Great Britain6.15 Section 17 of the Firearms (Amendment) Act 1988 provides for visitors to Great Britain to have in their possession, or purchase or acquire a firearm or ammunition under certain conditions without a firearm or shot gun certificate. Visitors’ permits are dealt with in Chapter 26. Under section 18(1) of the 1988 Act a person who has not been in Great Britain for more than thirty days in the preceding twelve months may purchase a firearm from a registered firearms dealer for export, without holding a firearm or shot gun certificate or visitor’s permit. The exemption does not extend to the actual possession of the firearm and the dealer must arrange for the export of the weapon without it first coming into the purchaser’s possession. The thirty days limit is an aggregate and does not have to be continuous. The purchase of a firearm for export without a certificate from a person other than a registered firearms dealer is not permitted.42
Guide on Firearms Licensing Law6.16 A firearm certificate granted in Northern Ireland is, by virtue of the definition of a firearm certificate in section 57(4), a firearm certificate for the purposes of the 1968 Act. Firearm certificates issued in Northern Ireland therefore have validity within Great Britain, conferring on individuals in possession of one the same entitlements and obligations that come with a certificate issued in England, Wales or Scotland. Visitors with Northern Ireland firearm certificates must comply with firearms law in England and Wales or Scotland (as applicable), in particular they must have permission from the Secretary of State or the Scottish Ministers if they wish to bring a small firearm (handgun) into the country. (These may be possessed on a firearm certificate in Northern Ireland.)Possession only of any type of firearm or ammunition without a certificatePermits authorising possession6.17 Section 7 of the 1968 Act enables a chief officer of police to issue to a person a permit authorising them to possess a firearm or ammunition to which section 1 of the 1968 Act applies, or a shot gun, in any special case where it may not be necessary or desirable to issue a certificate. For example, a permit should in normal circumstances be issued to authorise the temporary possession by a relative or the executor of a deceased person, or the receiver of a bankrupt’s estate, of firearms or ammunition forming part of the property of the deceased person or bankrupt. A permit may not be issued to authorise the purchase or acquisition of firearms or ammunition (but see section 5(1) of the 1988 Act and Chapter 14). If it does not specify possession only, it will be assumed by default that the permit allows use. A permit should be issued if a certificate holder’s firearm certificate or shot gun certificate has expired and they have made reasonable efforts to renew in good time.Authorised lending and possession of firearms for hunting etc6.18 Section 11A of the 1968 Act allows a non-certificate holder (‘the borrower’) to borrow and possess a rifle or a shot gun from another person (‘the lender’) on private premises lawfully, only if they meet the following four conditions and if, in the case of a rifle, the borrower is aged 17 or over:(i) That the borrowing and possession of the rifle or shot gun are for either hunting animals or shooting game or vermin, and/or for shooting at artificial targets;(ii) That the lender must be aged 18 or over, holds a certificate for the borrowed firearm and either has the legal right to allow others to enter the premises for hunting animals or shooting game or vermin, or has written authorisation from such a person to lend the rifle or shot gun on the premises;(iii) That the borrower’s possession and use of the rifle or shot gun complies with the conditions placed on the lender’s certificate; and(iv) That the lender must be present during the period during which the rifle or shot gun is borrowed. Alternatively, the borrower must be in the presence of another person who is aged 18 or over as described under either subsection 11A(3)(c)(i) or (ii) of the 1968 Act, provided that they hold a certificate in respect of the borrowed rifle or shot gun.43
Guide on Firearms Licensing Law6.19 Subsection 11A(6) further provides for the lawful purchase or acquisition and possession of ammunition by the borrower of a rifle on the same premises if:ï The ammunition is for use with the same firearm;ï The ammunition purchased or acquired by the borrower does not exceed the quantity of ammunition that the lender is authorised to possess at the time; andï The borrower’s possession and use of the ammunition complies with the conditions placed on the lender’s certificate.Possession of firearms and ammunition on service premises6.20 Section 16A of the Firearms (Amendment) Act 1988 allows a person to possess firearms and ammunition on service premises without holding a certificate or an authority from the Secretary of State or the Scottish Ministers provided they are under the supervision of a member of the armed forces. This was intended to apply to “Open Days” on military premises, military training areas and similar occasions, and does not allow civilians to handle firearms away from service premises, even under supervision. Section 16B of the 1988 Act allows a person who is being trained or assessed in the use of firearms under the supervision of a member of the Ministry of Defence Police may, without holding a certificate or obtaining the authority of the Secretary of State under section 5 of the principal Act, have in his possession a firearm and ammunition on relevant premises for the purposes of the training or assessment.Auctioneers, carriers, warehousemen and their servants6.21 The exemption in section 9(1) of the 1968 Act is limited to possession in the ordinary course of the business of the auctioneer, carrier or warehouseman. However, to sell firearms and ammunition by auction, expose for sale by auction or have in their possession for sale by auction, an auctioneer still requires a permit issued by the chief officer of police for the area in which the auction is to be held. When auctioneers are selling firearms or shot guns, or ammunition for either, they should ensure that the persons purchasing the items either have the relevant certificate or permit, or are able to show that they are exempt from the requirement for such a certificate (see Chapter 5).6.22 Section 14 of the 1988 Act requires that an auctioneer, carrier or warehouseman takes reasonable precautions for the safe custody of the firearms or ammunition in their or their servants’ possession in the course of their business. The loss or theft of any such firearm or ammunition must also be reported to the police immediately. Section 2 shot gun ammunition is outside the scope of this provision because its possession is not subject to certificate control. Failure to adhere to the requirements in section 14 is a criminal offence carrying a maximum of 6 months imprisonment or a level 5 fine (or both).6.23 It is considered that section 9(1) of the 1968 Act does not exempt auctioneers, carriers or warehousemen from the requirement to have a section 5 authority in respect of any prohibited weapon or prohibited ammunition which they may possess, whether in the ordinary course of business or otherwise. This is because, in section 57(4) of the 1968 Act, the word “certificate” is defined as meaning a “firearm certificate” or a “shot gun certificate”. It is therefore considered that the44
Guide on Firearms Licensing Lawreference to a “certificate” in section 9(1) of the 1968 Act does not also include an authority granted under section 5 of the 1968 Act.6.24 It is the Secretary of State’s view therefore, that for auctioneers, carriers or warehousemen to take possession of any prohibited weapons or ammunition in Great Britain they must first have an authority granted by the Secretary of State or Scottish Ministers under the provisions of section 5 of the 1968 Act.Direction and control6.25 It should be noted that “possession” relates not only to physical possession and that a person exercising “direction and control” over prohibited items might also be said to be in possession of them (see Chapter 3 for details of the procedure for seeking the authority of the Secretary of State or of Scottish Ministers).Auctioneers’ permits6.26 Section 9(2) of the 1968 Act provides that auctioneers may, without being registered as firearms dealers, sell by auction, expose for sale by auction, or have in their possession for sale by auction, firearms or ammunition to which section 1 of the 1968 Act applies, or shot guns, if they have obtained from the chief officer of police of the area in which the auction is held, a permit in the prescribed form. Auctioneers who deal regularly in firearms may wish to register as firearms dealers. It is the duty of auctioneers to satisfy themselves, by requiring the production of certificates or other authorities, that the purchasers of the firearms or ammunition are lawfully entitled to possess them.6.27 Following the amendment to section 3(1)(c) of the 1968 Act by section 31 of the Violent Crime Reduction Act 2006, auctioneers in England and Wales may sell air weapons provided they are a registered firearms dealer or have an auctioneer’s permit, and comply with its terms.6.28 By virtue of section 33 of the Firearms (Amendment) Act 1997, which requires the notification of transfers involving firearms, an auctioneer is required to inform the chief officer forthwith of the name and address of any person other than a registered firearms dealer, purchasing or acquiring any firearm or ammunition to which the permit refers. Firearms licensing departments may wish to consider granting an auctioneer’s permit not just for the day of the sale but for a period both before and after the sale. This would allow the auctioneer to collect the firearms and/or shot guns and, for an appropriate period after the sale, to allow for unsold firearms/shot guns to be returned or otherwise disposed of.Slaughtering instruments and ammunition6.29 The Slaughterhouses Act 1974 was repealed by SI 1995/731. Licensed slaughterers are now subject to the provisions of The Welfare of Animals (Slaughter or Killing) Regulations 1995 and the Welfare of Animals at the Time of Killing (Scotland) Regulations 2012 to possess slaughtering instruments and ammunition for them without a certificate in any slaughterhouse or knacker’s yard in which they are employed (section 10(1) of the 1968 Act). The proprietor of a slaughterhouse or knacker’s yard may, without holding a certificate, possess a slaughtering instrument and ammunition and must store them in safe custody at that slaughterhouse or knacker’s yard. This applies equally to a person appointed by the proprietor to take charge of slaughtering instruments and ammunition for45
Guide on Firearms Licensing Lawthem for that purpose (section 10(2) of the 1968 Act). Except in these circumstances, possession of a slaughtering instrument away from the slaughterhouse or knacker’s yard will require a firearm certificate.6.30 Butchers may sometimes find it necessary to hire or borrow a slaughtering instrument for the purpose of their business, for example when their own slaughtering instruments need repair. If they have to apply on each occasion for a variation on their firearm certificates to authorise the temporary acquisition of an additional instrument, there may be delay and inconvenience. The necessity for variations may, however, be obviated if the certificate contains an entry authorising the acquisition of an additional instrument by hiring or borrowing whenever the (authorised) instrument which the holder normally uses is not, for whatever reason, available for use. Such an entry may be made in that part of the certificate authorising purchase or acquisition when it is granted or, subsequently, by way of variation.6.31 It is suggested that this course should be adopted in any case in which butchers or other people who hold, or are entitled to hold, a free certificate under section 32(3)(c) of the 1968 Act satisfy the chief officer of police that they may need to occasionally hire or borrow an additional instrument to enable them to carry on their work when their own instrument needs attention or repair. The person providing the hired or borrowed instrument must complete the appropriate Table on the borrower’s certificate and notify the transaction to the chief officer in accordance with sections 32 to 35 of the 1997 Act.6.32 Under section 3(3) of the 1968 Act, a person is prohibited from undertaking the repair, test or proof of a firearm or ammunition to which section 1 of the 1968 Act applies, or a shot gun, unless the person seeking the repair or other work produces a certificate authorising their possession of the firearm or ammunition, or shows that they are entitled to have it without a certificate. Licensed slaughterers, proprietors of slaughterhouses or knacker’s yards, and persons appointed by such proprietors to take charge of slaughtering instruments and ammunition, are entitled to have possession of such instruments and ammunition without holding certificates, but only in the slaughterhouses or knacker’s yards in which they are employed or of which they are the proprietors.6.33 Under section 2(a) of the 1997 Act a person authorised by a firearm certificate to possess, purchase or acquire a slaughtering instrument does not need the authorisation of the Secretary of State to possess, purchase, acquire, sell or transfer a slaughtering instrument which falls within section 5(1)(aba) of the 1968 Act, that is small firearms. This exemption does not apply to registered firearms dealers.6.34 Similarly, under section 2(b) of the 1997 Act, authority under section 5 of the 1968 Act is not required for possession of a slaughtering instrument to which section 5(1)(aba) of the 1968 Act applies if a person is entitled to possess such an instrument without a firearm certificate under section 10 of the 1968 Act. This exemption does not apply to registered firearms dealers.Gun bearers6.35 Section 11(1) of the 1968 Act exempts from the certificate requirement a person carrying a firearm or ammunition to which section 1 of the 1968 Act applies, or shot guns, under the instruction of another person who holds a certificate and for46
Guide on Firearms Licensing Lawthat other person’s use for sporting purposes only. It does not entitle the bearer to use the firearm or shot gun. The courts have found that this exemption does not extend to unaccompanied possession of the firearms concerned, for example by a chauffeur transporting the firearms from one town to another, in which instance a certificate or permit would be required. Where the person doing the carrying is under eighteen, the exemption only applies if the certificate holder is eighteen or over – as per the amendment inserted by SI 2010/1759.Starting races6.36 Section 11(2) of the 1968 Act (as amended by the Firearms (Amendment) Regulations 2010) authorises the possession, without a certificate, of a firearm at an athletic meeting for the purpose of starting races at that meeting. This section does not, however, authorise the purchase or acquisition, without a certificate, of a firearm for such purposes nor does it apply to persons under eighteen years old. The possession of ammunition is not authorised, but blank ammunition not exceeding one inch in diameter may be held without a certificate. Furthermore, a person does not need authority under section 5 of the 1997 Act to possess, purchase, acquire, sell or transfer a firearm that is held on certificate with a condition that it is only to be used for controlling races at athletics meetings.6.37 The reason for this exemption is that major athletics events require controlling guns (commonly known as starting guns) which are classed as firearms and are able not only to produce a very loud bang but also a highly visible flash from the muzzle end of the gun to facilitate accurate timing. This is not applicable to cycling races or other similar events. In practice, only those starters who have achieved level 3, level 4 or above under the UK Athletics (UKA) licencing scheme should be granted a certificate (UKA has its own hierarchical licencing scheme in place for qualified starters at athletics events which is not linked to the Firearms Act). The UKA licence holder should also have a letter of approval issued by the Technical Committee of UKA and signed by a UKA Executive Officer.6.38 Most starting pistols, such as the ones used at school sports days, do not have an open barrel and are not classed as firearms. It is important to note that the legislation does not refer explicitly to UK Athletics Ltd (UKA) licenced starters. Although most unlikely, there may be other starters who can make a convincing case for possessing such firearms.6.39 Starting cannon used by yacht clubs are, provided that they were designed as signalling apparatus, exempt from the prohibition on small firearms contained in section 5(1)(aba) of the 1968 Act. However, persons wishing to possess such starting cannon must have a firearm certificate.Rifle and pistol clubs and cadet corps6.40 These are dealt with separately in Chapter 17.Firearms taken to and from Proof Houses6.41 Under section 58 (1) of the 1968 Act any person carrying firearms to or from the proof houses is exempt from the provisions of the Act, so long as the firearms are being carried for the purposes of proof.47
Guide on Firearms Licensing LawTheatrical, film and television productions6.42 Section 12(1) of the 1968 Act authorises the possession of a firearm, without holding a certificate, by any person taking part in a theatrical performance or rehearsal or in the production of a film. This equally applies to television productions. The section does not, however, authorise the purchase or acquisition, without a certificate, of a firearm for such purposes. A number of specialist registered firearms dealers hold stocks of firearms specifically for theatrical or film/television productions. These dealers transport the firearms to the production where they remain under their control and supervision whilst in use by the actors or production staff.6.43 Theatrical, television or film producers who wish to acquire firearms for the purpose of their production must obtain certificates. In such cases the fact that the firearm will be handed to and carried by actors in the production will, in the case of firearms to which section 1 of the 1968 Act applies, as a rule justify the addition of special conditions to the firearm certificate (see Appendix 3).6.44 In some cases arrangements are made by the theatrical, television and film producers to hire firearms for the purpose of their productions. It may be desirable in cases involving firearms to which section 1 of the 1968 Act applies to make it clear on the firearm certificate that the firearms specified may be hired only once unless second or subsequent hirings are authorised by specific variations of the certificate. In such cases the certificate might also bear a special condition (see Appendix 3).6.45 Section 8(2)(a) of the 1968 Act enables the producer to part with the possession of the firearms to the persons taking part in the performance or production.6.46 Section 12(1) of the 1968 Act does not authorise the possession of ammunition. In view of the exemption for blank cartridges not exceeding one inch in diameter, it is not an offence for persons taking part in a theatrical or television performance or rehearsal or the production of films to use such blank cartridges. A firearm certificate authorising the acquisition of firearms to which section 1 of the 1968 Act applies for the purposes specified in section 12, should not normally authorise the acquisition or possession of ammunition. In the absence of any relevant court rulings, chief officers of police will need to consider any applications on their individual merits, mindful of the need for consistent administration of the Acts.6.47 There might be value in distinguishing between historical plays and presentations, where there are costumed characters in a public presentation for which firearms and blank ammunition may be needed as props and there is some form of script and rehearsals, and battle re-enactment, where it would be more likely that the exemption would not apply. However, under section 12 (2), as amended by section 23 (2) of the Firearms (Amendment) Act 1988, the Secretary of State or Scottish Ministers may authorise a person in charge of a theatrical or television performance or rehearsal or the production of films to possess weapons prohibited under section 5 of the 1968 Act and also authorise selected other persons to have possession of those weapons while taking part in the performance, rehearsal or production.Ship and hovercraft equipment6.48 No certificate is necessary to authorise the possession of firearms and ammunition subject to section 1 of the 1968 Act on board a ship as part of the ship’s equipment48
Guide on Firearms Licensing Law(section 13(1)(a) of the 1968 Act). A certificate is, however, required to acquire. Under section 13(1)(c) of the 1968 Act a police officer may issue a permit (Form 115) authorising the removal of a firearm to which section 1 of the 1968 Act applies (but not ammunition), to or from a ship for any purpose specified in the permit. A permit granted by a police officer does not permit the possession of prohibited weapons subject to section 5 of the 1968 Act.6.49 Although there is no legal definition of what constitutes a “ship” within the 1968 Act, in the absence of a court ruling this effectively means a vessel designed to be ocean-going rather than one for travel on inland waterways.6.50 Note: Article 4 of the Hovercraft (Application of Enactments) Order 1972, taken in conjunction with Schedule 1 to the Order provides, amongst other things, that any reference in the 1968 Act in whatever terms to ships, vessels, boats or activities or places connected therewith shall include a reference to hovercraft or activities or places connected with hovercraft.Signalling apparatus on aircraft or at aerodromes6.51 Section 13(1)(a) of the 1968 Act also applies to the possession of signalling apparatus (for example, Very pistols) and ammunition for it. Section 13(1)(b) of the 1968 Act provides for such apparatus and ammunition, which are part of the equipment of aircraft, to be stored in safe custody at an aerodrome and to be removed between the place of storage and the aircraft, or from one aircraft to another at an aerodrome, without the necessity for a certificate or permit.6.52 A permit on Form 115 may be issued under section 13(1)(c) of the 1968 Act to cover any other case of removal of signalling apparatus. This permit is prescribed by the Firearms Rules 1998 – see rule 9(3) and Schedule 4 Part V.6.53 A firearm certificate is necessary to authorise the purchase or acquisition of signalling apparatus and ammunition but this may be issued free of charge (see Chapter 19 on fees).Birdscaring6.54 In the main there are two types of firearm used for birdscaring, a necessary safety measure at airfields: a firearm designed as signalling apparatus and modified accordingly (for example, a modified Very pistol) or a firearm purpose-built for birdscaring, almost without exception 12 bore. Where the firearm was designed as signalling apparatus, it would not be prohibited under section 5(1)(aba) of the 1968 Act even though it was now being used for birdscaring. Persons wishing to purchase or acquire such firearms can also benefit from the provisions in section 32(3)(b) of the 1968 Act in that no fee is payable where the certificate relates solely to signalling apparatus which the applicant requires as part of the equipment of the aerodrome. The certificate should, however, be conditioned to the effect that the firearm should be used only for signalling purposes and birdscaring (see Appendix 3).6.55 Each person permitted to use the equipment requires a suitably conditioned firearm certificate authorising the possession and use of the weapon for birdscaring purposes. The weapon cannot be passed to non-authorised persons.49
Guide on Firearms Licensing Law6.56 It should be noted that most cartridges used for these purposes contain a single projectile and are therefore subject to section 1 of the 1968 Act. Also, firearms specifically designed for birdscaring (not signalling) fall under section 5(1)(aba) of the 1968 Act (prohibited weapons) if they have a barrel less than 30cm, or are less than 60cm in overall length. Firearms specifically designed for birdscaring, and used for that purpose also attract a fee when held on certificate.50
Chapter 7: Young people
Guide on Firearms Licensing Law
7.1 This chapter explains how sections 22, 23, 24, 24ZA and 24A of the 1968 Act place restrictions on the purchase, hire, acquisition, possession and use of firearms by, and the transfer thereof to, young people. The subject of minimum age to carry a firearm or shot gun is complicated, therefore for ease of reference, Appendix 4 provides a summary of the legislative requirements in this area. It should be noted that the table in Appendix 4 is a legal summary and does not take into account issues around issuing firearms or shot gun certificates to those under eighteen.General7.2 Broadly you must be aged fourteen or over to have a firearm certificate. A person under eighteen is prohibited by section 22 of the 1968 Act from purchasing or hiring any firearm or ammunition (as defined by section 57 of the 1968 Act). Section 24A(1) of the 1968 Act also prohibits the purchase of imitation firearms by those under the age of eighteen.This includes:i. air weapons and ammunition for air weapons;ii. imitation firearms, realistic imitation firearms and deactivated firearms;iii. 	readily convertible replicas (as defined by section 1 of the Firearms Act 1982);iv. smooth-bore guns;v. shot gun cartridges;vi. blank ammunition.7.3 Section 24 makes it an offence to sell or let on hire firearms or ammunition to those under the age of eighteen. Section 24A(2) makes it an offence to sell imitation firearms to a person under the age of eighteen.7.4 A person aged under eighteen may however acquire other than by purchase or hire, air weapons (and air weapon ammunition), shot guns or shot gun cartridges to which section 2 of the 1968 Act applies, and firearms or ammunition to which section 1 of the 1968 Act applies according to the provisions laid out in this chapter. An example of acquisition would be using a firearm under the supervision of a parent or guardian (provided they are of the correct age).Exemptions for Section 1 & 2 Firearms7.5 Section 11 and 11A of the 1968 Act relate to exemptions for sports, athletics and other approved activities. Where the person carrying or borrowing the firearm is under the age of eighteen, the exemption only applies if the person for whom the51
Guide on Firearms Licensing Lawfirearm is being carried, or the lender or servant in whose presence the borrowed firearm is being used, is aged eighteen or over. Section 11(2) states that the race starting exemption is only available to persons aged eighteen or over.Authorised lending and possession of firearms for hunting etc7.6 Chapter 6 explains that section 11A of the 1968 Act allows a non-certificate holder (‘the borrower’) to borrow and possess a rifle or a shot gun from another person (‘the lender’) on private premises for either hunting animals or shooting game or vermin, and/or for shooting at artificial targets, but only if they meet a number of conditions:i. in the case of a rifle, the borrower is aged 17 or over;ii. the lender is aged 18 or over and holds a certificate for the borrowed firearm; and,iii. the lender either has the legal right to allow others to enter the premises for hunting animals or shooting game or vermin; or,iv. has written authorisation from such a person to lend the rifle or shot gun on the premises.7.7 When lending a rifle or shot gun, the borrower’s possession and use of the rifle or shot gun must comply with the conditions placed on the lender’s certificate.7.8 The lender must be present during the period during which the rifle or shot gun is borrowed. Alternatively, the borrower must be in the presence of another person who is aged 18 or over as described under either subsection 11A(5)(a) or (b) of the 1968 Act, provided that they hold a certificate in respect of the borrowed rifle or shot gun. The term “in the presence of” is not defined in law but is generally interpreted as being within sight or earshot.7.9 Subsection 11A(6) further provides for the lawful purchase or acquisition and possession of ammunition by the borrower of a rifle on the same premises if:ï The ammunition is for use with the same firearm;ï The ammunition purchased or acquired by the borrower does not exceed the quantity of ammunition that the lender is authorised to possess at the time; andï The borrower’s possession and use of the ammunition complies with the conditions placed on the lender’s certificate.7.10 Section 11(6) of the 1968 Act allows an individual, without holding a shotgun certificate, to use a shotgun at a time and place approved for shooting at artificial targets (i.e. a temporary clay pigeon shoot) by the chief officer of police for the area in which that place is situated. There is no requirement for organisers of such events to become registered firearms dealers. As the approval of such time and place is prescribed by law, chief officers may wish not only to satisfy themselves that such events are properly conducted and supervised, but also to establish that there are no public safety issues involved. When an exemption is granted, the chief officer should advise the organiser that they are responsible for ensuring, so far as is practicable, that adequate precautions are taken for the safety of the participants and any spectators. Shoots at which participants hold certificates do not require an exemption under section 11(6). Organisers operating in conjunction with business, such as52
Guide on Firearms Licensing Lawcorporate entertainment, will have additional responsibilities under the Health and Safety at Work Act 1974.Air weapons in England and Wales7.11 Section 22(1) of the 1968 Act makes it an offence for a person under the age of eighteen to purchase or hire any firearm or ammunition, and this will include air weapons and ammunition for air weapons.7.12 Section 22(4) of the 1968 Act makes it an offence for a young person under the age of eighteen to have with them an air weapon or ammunition for an air weapon, other than when they are:i. supervised by someone aged twenty-one or over (section 23(1));ii. a member of an approved club while engaged as such in connection with target shooting (section 23(2)(a));iii. at a shooting gallery where only air weapons or miniature rifles not exceeding .23 inch calibre are used (section 23(2)(b)); oriv. aged fourteen or over and on private premises with the consent of the occupier (section 23(3)).7.13 Section 24(1) of the 1968 Act was substituted by the Firearms (Amendment) Regulations 2010 (SI 2010/1759) with effect from 28 July 2010 and the revised provision makes it an offence to sell or let on hire any firearm or ammunition to a person under the age of eighteen. This includes air weapons. Under section 24(4) of the 1968 Act, it is an offence to make a gift, or part with possession, of an air weapon or ammunition for an air weapon to a person under the age of eighteen.7.14 Section 24ZA of the 1968 Act makes it an offence for a person in possession of an air weapon to fail to take reasonable precautions to prevent any person under the age of eighteen years from having the weapon with him. This does not apply where the person under the age of eighteen years is permitted to have an air weapon with them under one of the exceptions set out in section 23 of the 1968 Act. The provisions of section 58(2) of the 1968 Act mean that the offence in section 24ZA does not apply to an antique air weapon held as a curiosity or ornament (see Chapter 8).A defence to the offence in section 24ZA is provided where a person can show he had reasonable grounds for believing the other person to be aged eighteen or over.7.15 Under section 21A of the 1968 Act it is an offence for anyone of any age to have with him an air weapon and use it to fire beyond the boundary of the premises where they have permission to shoot.7.16 The offence relating to adults (aged twenty-one years or over) supervising those under the age of eighteen is found in section 23(1). It is a defence under section 23(1A) for the supervisor to show that the only property into or across which the missiles were fired, were premises where the occupier of which had consented to the53
Guide on Firearms Licensing Lawfiring of the missile (whether specifically or by general consent). See also Chapter 21.Air weapons in Scotland7.17 Section 2 of the Air Weapons and Licensing (Scotland) Act 2015 makes it an offence for a person to use, possess, purchase or acquire an air weapon in Scotland without holding an air weapon certificate issued by Police Scotland.7.18 Section 3 of the 2015 Act sets the minimum age to apply for an air weapon certificate at 14 years, and section 7 specifies mandatory conditions which must be attached to any certificate granted to a 14-17 year old. These mandatory conditions prohibit under-18s from purchasing, hiring, accepting a gift of or owning an air weapon and, additionally, limit their use of air weapons to certain activities such as target shooting or pest control on private land.7.19 Section 24(2) of the 2015 Act makes it an offence to sell or transfer an air weapon to anyone who is not entitled to possess it either by holding a valid certificate, being a registered firearms dealer, or otherwise being exempt. If they hold an air weapon certificate then it must not bear a condition which would prevent the sale, eg the mandatory condition prohibiting purchase that is attached to all certificates granted to under-18s. Air weapons may also be sold to visitors to Scotland aged 18 and over, provided the weapon will be sent directly out of Great Britain or to a dealer in England or Wales for collection.7.20 Schedule 1 of the 2015 Act sets out exemptions which permit the use of air weapons by under-14s in Scotland in certain situations, including on private land while being supervised by someone aged 21 or over who holds a valid air weapon certificate, or as a member of an approved air weapon club while being supervised by another club member aged 21 or over.7.21 Section 30 of the 2015 Act makes it an offence for a person of any age to fail to take reasonable precautions for the safe custody of air weapons in their possession, or to fail to report the loss or theft of an air weapon to the police as soon as reasonably practicable.7.22 For more detailed information about air weapons laws in Scotland please refer to the guidance issued by the Scottish Government: Air weapon licensing in Scotland: guide.Acquisition and possession by young peopleShot guns7.23 A person aged fifteen or over but under eighteen may acquire, other than by purchase or hire, shot guns to which section 2 of the 1968 Act applies, providing that they are in possession of a valid shot gun certificate.7.24 Section 22(3) of the 1968 Act makes it an offence for any person under the age of fifteen to have an assembled shot gun with them unless:i) they are under the supervision of a person aged twenty-one or over; or54
Guide on Firearms Licensing Lawii) the gun is so covered with a securely fastened gun cover that it cannot be fired.Note: i. the Act does not require the supervisor to be a certificate holder, though this is preferable. ii. See also paragraphs 7.6 to 7.9 explaining authorised lending and possession by young people.7.25 The Act does not prohibit a person under the age of fifteen from having a shot gun certificate. The Act also does not exempt a person under the age of fifteen from the need to have a shot gun certificate in order to have an assembled shot gun in their possession on private land in the circumstances described above in 7.24(i). In such cases the parent, guardian or other responsible adult will supervise the young person and take responsibility for the gun when not in use.7.26 Under section 24(3) of the 1968 Act it is an offence to make a gift of a shot gun, or ammunition for a shot gun, to a person under the age of fifteen. The effect of this provision is to ensure that persons under fifteen years of age may not be given guns of their own. It should be noted that the offence is committed by the giver of the shot gun, not the young person who receives it. A person under the age of fifteen may be taught to shoot. It is in the interests of safety that a young person who is to handle firearms should be properly taught at a relatively early age. Persons under the age of fifteen may either use a shot gun under existing exemptions set out in Chapter 6 or whilst holding their own shot gun certificate they may borrow one for 72 hours. Supervision by an adult aged twenty-one years or over applies in all circumstances.Section 1 firearms7.27 Section 22(2) of the 1968 Act prohibits persons under the age of fourteen from having with them any firearms or ammunition to which section 1 of the 1968 Act applies, except in circumstances where they are entitled by virtue of section 11(1) or 11(4) or section 15 of the Firearms (Amendment) Act 1988 to have possession of them without holding a firearm certificate. Note that section 11(3) of the 1968 Act was repealed by the Armed Forces Act 1996.7.28 Other than the circumstances above, it is an offence under section 24(2)(b) of the 1968 Act to part with the possession of any firearms or ammunition to which section 1 applies to a person who is under the age of fourteen (although it is not an offence by the young person to receive them). It is also an offence under section 24(2)(a) to make a gift of or lend a firearm or ammunition to which section 1 applies to a person under the age of fourteen.7.29 Section 24(5) of the 1968 Act provides that, in proceedings for an offence under any of the provisions in section 24 relating to the transfer of firearms to young persons, it is a defence to prove that the person charged with the offence believed the other person to be of or over the age mentioned in that provision and had reasonable grounds for the belief.7.30 A person under fourteen may not be granted a firearm certificate in any circumstances. However, there may be occasions where a parent is granted such a certificate, or an existing certificate is varied, in respect of a child under fourteen, for example, where the child will be participating in competitive target shooting. In55
Guide on Firearms Licensing Lawthese instances, the child would be expected to provide the primary “good reason” for the possession of the firearm. Both the parent and the child would be subject to the necessary background checks.7.31 A certificate can be granted authorising possession, as well as acquisition (for example, by borrowing or by receiving as a gift) to a person aged over fourteen but under eighteen. However, a firearm certificate may not be granted for the purchase and hire of firearms or ammunition to such a person.7.32 A young person holding a firearm or shot gun certificate may reach the age of eighteen during the life of the certificate. In these cases, it must be made clear to the holder that they may not purchase any firearm or ammunition before the date of their eighteenth birthday. This advice should take the form of a notice added to the certificate (see Appendix 3).7.33 When a parent or other adult wishes to purchase a firearm to which section 1 of the 1968 Act applies for presentation to a young person between the ages of fourteen and under eighteen, both the adult and the young person must be in possession of certificates, or other lawful authority (for example, as would be given to a member of a cadet corps). The adult will need the authority to enable them to purchase, and the young person to enable them to acquire and possess the firearms and ammunition. The same principle would apply to a shot gun to which section 2 of the 1968 Act applies for presentation to a young person between the ages of fifteen and eighteen. In some cases the parent or other adult may wish the firearm to appear on both certificates for reasons of joint storage. However, the supervisor of a young person over the age of fourteen need not be a certificate holder.Imitation firearms7.34 Section 24A of the 1968 Act makes it an offence for anyone aged under eighteen to purchase an imitation firearm and for anyone to sell an imitation firearm to someone aged under eighteen.7.35 “Imitation firearm” is defined in section 57(4) of the Firearms 1968 as “any thing which has the appearance of being a firearm (other than such a weapon as is mentioned in section 5(1)(b) of this Act) whether or not it is capable of discharging any shot, bullet or other missile”. It will ultimately be for the courts to decide whether an item falls within this definition but clearly it will apply to the purchase and sale of realistic imitation firearms where this is allowed under one of the statutory defences (see Chapter 2). It will also apply to non-realistic imitations which nevertheless have “the appearance of being a firearm”. This could include some children’s toys although many toys will look so different from a firearm they might not be regarded as an imitation at all (for example, some of the more futuristic looking space guns). Where a toy is considered to be an imitation firearm, the purchase will have to be made by a parent or other person aged over eighteen.7.36 There is a defence for anyone charged with the offence of selling an imitation firearm to someone under the age of eighteen, where he can show that he had reasonable grounds for believing the purchaser to be eighteen or over – for example, by seeing credible proof of age.56
Guide on Firearms Licensing LawDeactivated firearms7.37 Section 38(7) of the Violent Crime Reduction Act 2006 defines a deactivated firearm as an ‘imitation firearm’: a firearm which has been rendered incapable of discharging a shot, bullet or other missile, (as opposed to a ‘realistic imitation firearm’). Therefore by virtue of section 24A of the 1968 Act, a deactivated firearm must be bought by or sold to someone aged eighteen or over (see also paragraph 2.15).Arrangements for the storage of firearms held on a certificate by under 18s7.38 Where a firearm certificate holder is under the age of eighteen, Rule 3(4)(iv)(c) of the Firearms Rules 1998 (as inserted by rule 2 of the Firearms (Amendment) (No.2) Rules 2019) requires arrangements to be made for an adult to assume responsibility for the secure storage of the firearms and ammunition to which the certificate relates.7.39 The person assuming responsibility must be either the certificate holder’s parent or guardian, or a person aged 18 or over who is authorised to have possession of such firearms and ammunition. It may not always be necessary for the parent or guardian to also have a firearms certificate if arrangements are made for the firearm to be secured in a cabinet with two separate locks which can only be opened when both key holders are present and one of the key holders is a certificate holder.7.40 Rule 5 of the Firearms Rules 1998 makes similar provision in respect of shot guns held by a shot gun certificate holder who is under the age of 18. Again, the person assuming responsibility will either be the holder’s parent or guardian, or a person aged 18 or over who is authorised to have possession of such shot guns7.41 Police forces will add a condition on secure storage to certificates when an application for grant, variation or renewal is received in respect of a person aged under 18.57
Guide on Firearms Licensing LawChapter 8: Antique firearms8.1 Under section 58(2) of the 1968 Act, antique firearms which are sold, transferred, purchased, acquired or possessed as a curiosity or ornament are exempt from most of the controls in the 1968 Act, including the need for certification and being able to trade in them without being registered with the police as a firearms dealer. Previously, the Act did not define “antique firearm” but section 126 of the Policing and Crime Act 2017 created a statutory definition of “antique firearm” by inserting new subsections (2A) to (2H) into section 58, which define an antique firearm by reference to its date of manufacture, the type of cartridge it was designed to use, and by reference to its propulsion system. These descriptions are specified in the Antique Firearms Regulations 2021 (“the 2021 Regulations”).The statutory definition8.2 The requirement for an antique firearm to be sold, transferred, purchased, acquired or possessed as a curiosity or ornament, in order for the exemption in section 58(2) of the 1968 Act to apply, is unchanged and continues to apply in all cases.8.3 Under section 58(2), an “antique firearm” is a firearm that meets the following conditions:a) either its propulsion system is of a specified type (see paragraph 8.4 and section 58(2C) of the 1968 Act) or the chamber or chambers are those that the firearm had when it was manufactured (or is a replacement that is identical in all material respects) and the firearm is chambered for use with a specified cartridge (see paragraph 8.5 and section 58(2B) of the 1968 Act); andb) it was manufactured before a specified date (see paragraph 8.8 and section 58(2D)(b)).Propulsion systems8.4 A firearm can be regarded as an antique if its propulsion system is of a specified description (see section 58(2C) of the 1968 Act). Regulation 3 of the 2021 Regulations specifies the following types of propulsion system:a) any propulsion system which involves the use of a loose charge and a separate ball (or other missile) loaded at the muzzle end of the barrel, chamber or cylinder of the firearm and which uses an independent source of ignition. This covers muzzle-loading firearms;b) any propulsion system in a breech-loading cartridge firearm which uses an ignition system other than rim-fire or centre-fire. For example, this would include pin-fire and needle-fire ignition systems, as well as lip fire, cup- primed, teat fire and base fire systems;58
Guide on Firearms Licensing Lawc) any propulsion system which involves the use of rim-fire cartridges (other than .22 (5.58 mm), .23 (5.8 mm), 6mm or 9mm rim-fire cartridges) in a breech-loading firearm; ord) any propulsion system for an air weapon (England and Wales only). This does not include prohibited air weapons or air weapons of a type declared specially dangerous.Obsolete cartridges8.5 Under section 58(2B) of the 1968 Act, a firearm can also be regarded as an antique if:a) its chamber (or each of its chambers, if it has more than one) is either a chamber it had when it was manufactured or it is a replacement for such a chamber that is identical to it in all material respects; andb) its chamber (or each of its chambers) is designed for use with a specified type of cartridge, whether or not it is also capable of being used with other cartridges. Regulation 2 and the Schedule to the 2021 Regulations specify those cartridges.8.6 The Antique Firearms (Amendment) Regulations 2021 come into effect on 28 December 2021 and will correct an omission from the 2021 Regulations by adding to paragraph 5 of the Schedule (cartridges for vintage rifles, punt guns and shot guns) cartridges with bores greater than 10. The Amendment Regulations also make a number of minor and typographical corrections to the descriptions of other cartridges specified in the Schedule.8.7 The cartridges specified in the Schedule to the 2021 Regulations are arranged according to the type of firearm (longarm or pistol) for which they were designed. However, this is for ease of reference and it is possible that a cartridge listed under one firearm type was also designed to be used with another firearm type. The cartridges specified in the Schedule comprise a single list and provided the requirements of section 58(2) - read together with the 2021 Regulations - are met and the cartridge appears somewhere in the Schedule, the firearm can be regarded as antique.8.8 Further information on the cartridges listed in the Schedule to the 2021 Regulations, including variations in their descriptions, can be found in published sources, including:Cartridges of the World (Barnes) Cartridges for Collectors (Datig)European Cartridge Research Association Data ViewerManual of Pistol and Revolver Cartridges (Erlmeier and Brandt H) History and Development of Small Arms Ammunition (Hoyem) Military Rifle and Machine Gun Cartridges (Huon)Pistol and Revolver Cartridges (White & Munhall)59
Guide on Firearms Licensing LawDate of manufacture8.9 To be regarded as an antique, a firearm must have been manufactured before the date specified in regulation 4 of the 2021 Regulations, which is 1 September 1939 (see also section 58(2D) of the 1968 Act).Changes to the previous list of obsolete cartridges8.10 Home Office guidance previously included the following cartridges in the obsolete calibre list, which made them acceptable as qualifying a firearm as antique. However, following their use in crime, the Government decided not to include them in the list of obsolete cartridges in the Schedule to the 2021 Regulations. This meant that from 22 March 2021, all firearms chambered for use with these cartridges ceased to be regarded as exempt antiques and became subject to the controls in the 1968 Act, including certification and the need to be registered as a firearms dealer to trade in them..320 British (also known as .320 Revolver CF, short or long).41 Colt (short or long).44 Smith and Wesson Russian.442 Revolver (also known as .44 Webley)9.4mm Dutch Revolver10.6mm German Ordnance Revolver11mm French Ordnance Revolver M1873 (Army)8.11 The following cartridges were added to the list of obsolete cartridges in the Schedule to the 2021 Regulations, meaning that from 22 March 2021, firearms which are chambered for use with these cartridges and which meet the other statutory criteria for antique firearms, are exempt from licensing control and can be possessed without a firearm certificate or, where relevant, a section 5 authority and/or the need to be registered as a firearms dealer..26 BSA (.26 Rimless Belted Nitro Express).33 BSA (.33 Rimless Belted Nitro Express).360 No 2 Nitro Express.40 BSA (.40 Rimless Belted Nitro Express).400/360 2 ? in Nitro Express.425 Westley Richards Magnum.475 x 3 ? in Nitro Express.475 No 2 Jeffery Nitro Express.475 No 2 Nitro Express.476 Nitro Express (.476 Westley Richards.50-90 2 ? inch.50-110 2.4 inch.577 – 3 in (Black Powder & Nitro Express).577 – 3 ? in (Black Powder & Nitro Express)6.5 x 53mm R Mannlicher (Dutch/Romanian)60
Guide on Firearms Licensing Law8 x 56mm Mannlicher Schoenauer 8 x 58 mm R Krag8 mm Murata9 x 56mm Mannlicher Schoenauer 9 x 57mm R Mauser9 x 57mm Rimless Mauser9.5 x 57mm Mannlicher Schoenauer 8mm Roth SteyrAmmunition8.12 Ammunition does not benefit from the exemption for antique firearms, and the possession of live ammunition suitable for use with an otherwise antique firearm may indicate that the firearm is not possessed as a curiosity or ornament.Firearms of modern manufacture8.13 The exemption for antique firearms does not apply to firearms manufactured on or after 1 September 1939. Fully working modern firing replicas of old firearms, eg those used to fire blanks by historical re-enactment societies but capable of firing live ammunition, would not qualify as antique firearms and must be held on certificate.Occasional firing8.14 An antique firearm can only be held as a curiosity or ornament and cannot be fired. However, they can be added to a firearm or shot gun certificate for the purposes of collection and occasional firing. Where the ‘good reason’ for possession is collection and not target shooting, section 44 of the Firearms (Amendment) Act 1997 requiring membership of a club to be named on the certificate is not applicable. Where a person has an antique firearm which they wish to fire for test, research, re-enactment, target shooting or competition purposes, no test of frequency of use should be applied when assessing good reason to possess: the primary reason for possession will be collection.8.15 An antique firearm may be brought on to a certificate or removed from time to time or when there is a change of ownership. A signed statement of intent by the owner to the local police firearms licensing department should be sufficient to effect the necessary change of status when required. A variation fee would become payable where an ‘antique’ is brought onto certificate to allow it to be fired, unless a ‘one for one’ variation is sought. In the latter case, it should be borne in mind that mostly only mass-produced muzzle-loading arms had standardised bore sizes. Therefore, a variation for a craft-made muzzle-loader may require finding a suitable example before the calibre can be ascertained. As this may take some time, some latitude may be given over the time taken for such ‘one for one’ variations.61
Guide on Firearms Licensing LawAir weapons8.16 In England and Wales, air weapons that are not ‘specially dangerous’ as defined in the Firearms (Dangerous Air Weapons) Rules 1969, are not subject to certificate control. However, section 3 of the 1968 Act requires anyone who sells or transfers such air weapons by way of trade or business to register with the police as a firearms dealer. Old air weapons that meet the definition of an antique firearm are exempt from control and therefore it is not necessary to register as a dealer in order to sell or transfer such weapons. Appendix 5 contains guidance on the most common types of air weapon manufactured before 1939.8.17 As set out in section 58(2E) of the 1968 Act, the definition of antique firearm does not apply to air weapons in Scotland, where responsibility for air weapons is devolved to the Scottish Government.Provisions of the 1968 Act which apply to antique firearms8.18 The following provisions of the 1968 Act apply to firearms which are otherwise exempt as antiques:section 19 – offence of carrying a firearm in a public place without lawful authority or reasonable excuse;section 20 – offence of trespassing with a firearm;section 21 – persons prohibited from possessing firearms;Schedule 3 – jurisdiction and procedure on application for removal of prohibition under section 21; andany other provision of the 1968 Act, so far as it applies to an offence under sections 19, 20 and 21.62
Guide on Firearms Licensing LawChapter 9: Historic handguns9.1 Section 5 of the 1968 Act prohibits any firearm which either has a barrel less than 30cm in length or is less than 60cm in length overall. Prohibited weapons can only be possessed with the authority of the Secretary of State. However, section 7 of the 1997 Act provides an exemption for ownership of certain classes of historic handguns by private individuals providing certain conditions are met.9.2 This chapter provides guidance on how section 7 might be applied in practice. Decisions about whether the terms of section 7 have been met and the discretion to grant or refuse a firearm certificate rests with chief officers of police, as set out in the 1968 Act. The interpretation of the law remains a matter for the courts.9.3 If a person wishes to possess a handgun under section 7, the chief officer of police must be satisfied that the firearm is one to which the provisions of section 7 apply. The burden therefore rests with the owner to provide evidence that the handgun concerned falls within the scope of section 7. This guidance sets out the issues and the evidence which the police may wish to consider in deciding whether to grant a firearm certificate in these circumstances.Section 7 of the 1997 Act9.4 The text of section 7, as amended by The Scotland Act 1998 (Transfer of Functions to the Scottish Ministers etc.) Order 1999 (SI 1999/1750), is as follows:Section 7: Firearms of historic interest:(1) The authority of the Secretary of State or the Scottish Ministers is not required by virtue of subsection (1)(aba) of section 5 of the 1968 Act for a person to have in his possession, or to purchase or acquire, or to sell or transfer, a firearm which—(a) was manufactured before 1st January 1919; and(b) is of a description specified under subsection (2) below,if he is authorised by a firearm certificate to have the firearm in his possession, or to purchase or acquire it, subject to a condition that he does so only for the purpose of its being kept or exhibited as part of a collection.(2) The Secretary of State may by order made by statutory instrument specify a description of firearm for the purposes of subsection (1) above if it appears to him that—(a) firearms of that description were manufactured before 1st January 1919; and63
Guide on Firearms Licensing Law(b) ammunition for firearms of that type is not readily available.(3) The authority of the Secretary of State or the Scottish Ministers is not required by virtue of subsection (1)(aba) of section 5 of the 1968 Act for a person to have in his possession, or to purchase or acquire, or to sell or transfer, a firearm which—(a) is of particular rarity, aesthetic quality or technical interest, or(b) is of historical importance,if he is authorised by a firearm certificate to have the firearm in his possession subject to a condition requiring it to be kept and used only at a place designated for the purposes of this subsection by the Secretary of State or the Scottish Ministers (by virtue of provision made under section 63 of the Scotland Act 1998).(4) This section has effect without prejudice to section 58(2) of the 1968 Act (antique firearms).9.5 In broad terms, section 7 of the 1997 Act divides historic handguns, other than antiques and muzzle-loaders, into two classes: those which may be kept at home without ammunition, and those which may be kept and fired at a designated secure site.9.6 Set out below is an explanation of how the terms of section 7 might apply in practice.Historic handguns which might be kept at home9.7 The police may grant a firearm certificate for a firearm to be kept at home (as opposed to at a designated site) under the terms of section 7(1) if the normal criteria for the grant of a certificate are satisfied and if the firearm meets all of three tests:(i) it must be of a kind for which the Secretary of State has decided that ammunition is not readily available in the UK;(ii) the actual gun (not just the make or model) must have been manufactured before 1 January 1919; and(iii) the certificate must be subject to a condition that the gun must be kept or exhibited as part of a collection.9.8 Section 7(2) gives the Secretary of State the power to list by Statutory Instrument those firearms to which section 7(1)(b) applies and therefore do not require an authority from the Secretary of State or Scottish Ministers. These represent both those cartridges used in rifles and carbines which can be purchased lawfully, and those calibres in common international circulation which are regularly used in crime64
Guide on Firearms Licensing Lawin the UK. The Firearms (Amendment) Act 1997 (Firearms of Historic Interest) Order 1997 (SI 19997/1537) is made under this power, and states that the following types of firearm are subject to section 7(1):All small firearms as defined by section 5(1)(aba) of the Firearms Act 1968 (small firearms) except those chambered for the following types of ammunition. These are set out in The Firearms (Amendment) Act 1997 (Firearms of Historic Interest) Order 1997 (Statutory instrument 1997/1537) as follows:ï 22” rim-fireï .25” ACP/6.35mmï .25” – 20ï .32” ACP/7.65mmï .32” – 20ï .32” Smith & Wesson Longï 7.62mm Soviet Tokarevï .38” 40 Winchesterï .380 ACP/9mm shortï 9mm Luger/Parabellum/9x19mmï .38 Smith & Wessonï .38” Specialï .38-200ï .44” Specialï .44” – 40 Winchesterï .45 ACPï .45” Colt Revolver9.9 This is a statutory provision, and any gun chambered for the above types of ammunition cannot benefit from the provisions of section 7(1) and (2). The police have no power to waive the terms of the Statutory Instrument and allow firearms of these chamberings to be kept at home. Likewise, further ammunition can only be declared “readily available” by the Secretary of State. Handguns covered by the list would include, for example, the Browning Models 1900, 1906 and 1910, the Colt 1917 in .45” ACP, the Mauser c96 in 9mm Parabellum, the P08 Luger in 9mm, and the Webley 1906 as the ammunition for these may be available. However, guns of these types might benefit from the terms of section 7(3).9.10 As well as being a type for which ammunition is not readily available, the individual gun (not just the make or model) must have been manufactured before 1 January 1919. This date was chosen to include both guns of the First World War era and the work of the smaller gunsmiths in the UK or abroad who ceased production before or during the Great War. This is a statutory requirement, and the police cannot grant a firearm certificate for a pistol made after this date to be kept at home under section 7(1). The police will therefore wish to be satisfied that the gun falls within this category.9.11 Certain types of gun stopped being made before 1919. These would include the following:65
Guide on Firearms Licensing LawAdams	revolversColt:	Model 1873 and Model 1878 revolvers in .450, .455 and .476 calibreEnfield	Mk I and Mk II .476 service revolversKynoch	revolversLancaster	four and two-barrelled pistols (“howdah pistols”)Smith & Wesson	Model No.3 revolver in .450, and .455 calibreSmith & Wesson	.22 rim-fire tip-up Model 1 First, Second and Third Issues. [These can be identified by the barrel being tipped upwards before the cylinder can be removed for reloading].Smith & Wesson	Hand Ejector in .450 and .455 calibresTranter	revolversWebley	No.4 and No. 4 1/2 (the Webley Pryse revolver)Webley	KaufmanWebley	All WG models - 1889, 1891, 1892, 1893 1896, Army and TargetWebley	pistols chambered for .455 self-loading (SLP) (semi-rimless) cartridgesWilkinson & Webley Wilkinson revolvers Pryse type, 1892, 1900 and 1905 (a few model 1911s were made after 1918 (see 9.13 below).Dutch	10mm model 1894Section 7(1) category9.12 Certain types of gun were made only from 1919 and would not fall into this category. Examples would be the following:Astra:	400, 600 and 900 pistolsBeretta:	M 1934 pistol M 1935 pistolBrowning FN:	Model 1922 pistol, Model 1935 (also known as GP, Grand Puissance or High Power) in 9mm ParabellumColt:	Official Police and Detective Special revolversEnfield:	Service revolvers No. 2 MkI, MkI* and MkI**Frommer:	Model 37 pistolMAB:	Model D pistolMauser:	Model 1934 pistol and Model HSC pistolRadom:	VIS 35 pistolSauer:	Model 38 H pistolSmith & Wesson:	Military & police model revolver - version in .38 S &W (.38-200)Star:	Model B pistolTokarev:	Model TT 33 pistolWalther:	Model PP and Model PPK pistols, P38 pistol in 9mm ParabellumWebley:	Small frame (put in to distinguish from large frame Mark IV made from 1899 to c. 1904) Mark IV revolver in .22LR, .32S&W Long &.38 S&W (.38-200)Unique:	M17 pistol9.13 The manufacture of certain models continued beyond 1918. In these cases, the main record of whether an individual example was made before 1919 will be the serial number. Set out below is a table of the more common guns spanning this66
Guide on Firearms Licensing Lawperiod and the serial numbers. Please note that guns in “readily available” calibres are not eligible for Section 7(1) status even if they are made before 1919: the information below should be read in conjunction with paragraph 9.21 below.MakeModelCalibrePre-1/1/1919 serial numberAstraCampo Giro M 1913 pistol9mm largo8,038ColtSingle Action Army (Frontier, in.44/40).45 & .44/40*337,200ColtArmy Special & Officers.38 Special431,999ColtNew Service (Army, Navy, Marine).45 Colt170,499ColtUS Model 1917.45 ACP139,350 (on base of butt)ColtPocket Positive.32 (various)84,999ColtPolice Positive.22 Long Rifle15,899ColtPolice Positive.32 (Various)142,999ColtPolice Positive.38 S&W99,999ColtPolice Positive Special.38 Special &.32/20161,999ColtModels 1902 Military & 1903 Pocket.38 ACP40,499ColtModel 1903 Hammerless.32ACP/7.65mm289,999ColtModel 1908 Hammerless.380ACP/9mm short33,499ColtModel 1908 Hammerless.25ACP/6.35mm192,499ColtUS Model 1911 (Military:unprefixed no)45ACP580,600ColtGovernment Model (commercial).45ACP &.455 SLP106,800(serial number prefixed C(.45) or W(.455))ColtTarget Model0.226,499FNModel 19007.65mm715753FNModel 19039mm BL39493FNModel 19066.35mm507695FNModel 19107.65mm & 9mm short734587LugerMilitary Models9mm ParabellumYear overLugerCommercial Models9mm Parabellumchamber 76,500LugerSwiss 1900/067.65mm Parabellum15,215MauserM 1914 pistol7.65mm185,414MauserM 1910 pistol6.35mm199,00067
Guide on Firearms Licensing LawMauserC 96 “Broomhandle”7.63mm or (9x25)430,000MauserC96 “Broomhandle” 140mm barrel7.63mm or (9x25)433,000SauerM 1913 Old Model pistol7.65 & 6.35mm85,467Smith & WessonPerfected Hand ejector (HE) (M frame).22 Long Rifle25,975Smith & WessonRegulation Police &.32 HE (I frame).32 S&W Long272,198Smith & WessonSafety Hammerless.32 S&W215,501Smith & WessonMilitary & Police (K frame)32/2080,422Smith & Wesson.35 Automatic0.357,490Smith & WessonSafety Hammerless.38 S&W245,934Smith & WessonDouble Action Perfected.38 S&W57,701Smith & WessonMilitary & Police (K frame).38 Special292,004Smith & WessonRegulation Police (I frame).38 S&W5,781Smith & Wesson.44 Military/.44 Target (N frame).44 Special15,598Smith & WessonUS Model 1917 (N frame).45ACP145,832WebleySolid frame, often mark’d Bulldog, RIC etc)Various102,148WebleyHinge frame pocket Mark II & III.38021,899WebleyWP hammer and hammerless.323,019WebleyFosbery.38 ACP and .4554,339WebleyMkVI & WS Army/WS Target and Webley Wilkinson 1911.22 & .455430,959*WebleySelf-loading.25, .32, .380, .455, 9mm BL .38HV (.38ACP)119,171WebleySelf-loading (Navy and RHA)0.4558,000Note: If chambered for an obsolete calibre the above Webleys would be Section 58(2).Some Webley Wilkinson 1911 models were made after 1918. All Webley Wilkinson 1911s were numbered in the same series as the Mark VI and WS. During the years 1931 to 1939 Webley renovated and re-numbered over 700 Mk 6 service revolvers which were originally made pre-1919. These revolvers will be found between serial numbers 453101 and 455067 inclusive. Specific information may be obtained from Arms Research Co.9.14 Other firearms were assembled from parts made before 1919 and where evidence can be shown that this was the case then these firearms may also benefit from section 7(1) and be held as such.68
Guide on Firearms Licensing Law9.15 Some manufacturers applied an assembly number, and/or a serial number associated with a particular contract, to each of their firearms. This was in addition to the manufacturer’s conventional serial number. Confusion over serial numbers is most likely to occur with Smith & Wesson revolvers. Where there is doubt about the correctness of any serial number, specialist advice should be obtained (see Appendix 1).9.16 In the case of guns that are not listed above, it is open to the owner to present evidence on the date of manufacture of the gun concerned. The police may wish to consider the following kinds of evidence where this is available:(i) The calibre of firearm listed on the firearm certificate;(ii) A factory letter from the makers setting out the date of manufacture;(iii) 	Extracts from standard reference works giving the date of manufacture of the model;(iv) An insurance or dealer’s valuation setting out the details of the gun.9.17 Guns where there have been extensive replacement of components, using parts manufactured after 1 January 1919, should not generally be regarded as having been made before 1919. This would include guns with pre-1919 frames but most other working parts made after that date. However, minor repair work or the replacement of a single part would not invalidate the original date of manufacture.Part of a collection9.18 The terms of section 7(1) of the 1997 Act require that the person must be authorised by a certificate, subject to a condition that he only possesses, purchases, or acquires it for the purpose of its being kept or exhibited as part of a collection. As this is a statutory requirement, the police must be satisfied that the collection is genuine, rather than merely a device to get round the terms of the Act. The same principle applies where a section 7(3) application depends upon the firearm forming a part of a collection (see paragraphs 9.19 and 9.25 (iv)). See Chapter 12 for further information on collecting firearms.9.19 In deciding whether a gun is part of a collection, the police will wish to consider the following points:(i) A “collection” of firearms will normally have to consist of several related firearms of historic interest, rather than only one or two guns (but see (iii) below about being part of a larger collection of other artefacts). For example, these might be other firearms to which section 7(1) of the 1997 Act might apply, guns held at a designated site under section 7(3) of the 1997 Act, or firearms under section 1 or section 2 of the 1968 Act, or “antique” firearms held under the terms of section 58(2) of the 1968 Act, or muzzle-loading guns. These should all be part of a coherent collection, rather than held for game-shooting or other purposes.(ii) The collection would be expected to be of historic interest, rather than simply of personal or sentimental interest to the owner. Owners would normally be expected to produce supporting evidence, for example a letter from a national museum or a relevant society or interest group, that the collection was of genuine historic value.69
Guide on Firearms Licensing Law(iii) A firearm could be possessed under this section if it is part of a collection of other artefacts so long as the firearm is a significant component of the collection. This may be the case where the firearm forms a small part of a larger and established collection of related historic items, for example those relating to a famous historical figure. The police may reject “collections” of other artefacts put forward mainly to support the possession of a single firearm;(iv) Genuine collectors of firearms for their own interest will often, though not always, be established members of the learned societies in this field, for example the Historical Breechloading Smallarms Association or the Vintage Arms Association;(v) The collection will usually need to be established and substantial before a firearm certificate with a section 7 condition is granted. The police will not normally grant a certificate for a single gun to begin a collection, unless there is very strong evidence that this will, in a short period of time, form part of a larger collection (although some collectors may have smaller collections). It should be recognised that since 1997, the availability of this category of firearm is much reduced and hence it may not be easily or quickly acquired;(vi) If a firearm certificate is granted in respect of a collection, the police will wish to consider applications to acquire further historic firearms on individual merits. In particular, the police will wish to be satisfied that any new guns will form a proper part of the existing collection which may have more than one theme;(vii) Anyone wishing to begin a collection will have to provide evidence of a genuine and well-established interest in historic firearms (see also (v) above).9.20 If the gun falls into the above category and forms part of a genuine collection, then it might be eligible to be kept at home without ammunition. The term ‘at home’ is a term used in this guidance rather than set in legislation. Section 7(1) of the 1997 Act refers to a certificate allowing the firearm to be in the person’s possession. If the gun does not fall into the above category, or if the owner wishes to fire the gun, then section 7(3) may apply. While the term “at home” is used to distinguish these guns from those held at a designated site, this does not preclude the owner from removing the guns under the authority of their certificate, for example to take them to an auction, or an exhibition of historic arms or illustrate a lecture. Notification to police is only required where this is a condition of the certificate. Such a condition is not standard and would need to be agreed and where used, carefully worded for the circumstances.9.21 The certificate allows the certificate holder, not other people, to possess the firearm. Therefore, if other people possess the firearm, they would be committing an offence under section 1 of the 1968 Act. Whether or not handling constitutes possession will depend upon the circumstances and the context. The cases of Hall v Cotton 1987 and Woodage v Moss 1974 provide some principles as follows:i. Possession can include having a firearm under your control without it being in your physical possession, or in your home e.g. if someone keeps a firearm in a locked cabinet in their relation’s house.70
Guide on Firearms Licensing Lawii. The concept of possession includes both proprietary and custodial possession, i.e. both ownership/control and physical possession. There is a distinction between custody and possession, so proprietary possession and custodial possession are two different concepts.iii. A person can remain in “possession” of a firearm within the meaning of section 1 at a time when he is not physically in control of it.iv. The concept of possession has never been exhaustively defined in English law. Its precise meaning can vary according to the context and according to the Act of parliament in which the question arises.9.22 It should be noted that section 7(3) of the 1997 Act can be used for collecting purposes, either as an extension of a section 7(1) collection, or in its own right. “Relevance to a collection” can be a factor in deciding on the acceptability of a firearm under section 7(1) or 7(3). Thus, for instance, a comprehensive collection of British military revolvers could, for example, be expected to include what was once a relatively common .38 Enfield of the 1930s or 1940s alongside a rare .476 Enfield Mark I of 1879.Firearms to be stored at a designated site9.23 Section 7(3) of the 1997 Act provides that owners keep and use their guns at a site designated by the Secretary of State if they hold a firearm certificate issued by their local police. In order to qualify for this exemption, a gun must meet the criteria set out in section 7(3). Being authorised by a certificate to acquire a firearm subject to a section 7(3) exemption is specific to a particular firearm. It should not be a “blanket” authority to acquire any firearm to which this exemption applies. In cases of older handguns which do not have a serial number, the make, model and calibre would be sufficient information.9.24 In reaching a decision as to whether a firearm falls within the terms of section 7(3), the police may wish to consider how all of the criteria set out in that section might apply. A firearm might qualify for the exemption under several related headings; for example an old gun of unusual design of which very few examples survive will meet several criteria. However, each criterion stands in its own right, and the police need only be satisfied that the gun falls within one of the criteria in order for it to be included. In assessing each gun, the police will wish to consider the following four criteria: (i) historical importance; (ii) aesthetic quality; (iii) technical interest; and (iv) particular rarity.Historical importance9.25 A firearm might be considered to be of historical importance if it meets any of the following criteria. It should be borne in mind that historic can include more recent history;i. A firearm owned by a famous historical figure would probably be counted as historically important in itself. Famous figures would include senior military officers, members of royal families, famous statesmen and leaders, or famous sporting figures, or soldiers or civilians decorated for service in which the firearm was carried. Any provenance would have to be clearly established and supported;71
Guide on Firearms Licensing Lawii. Guns owned by lesser-known figures would not generally benefit from this exemption, unless they had a significant campaign history. The police may not wish to grant a certificate in respect of a firearm held by a family member simply because it is an heirloom, unless it is a “trophy of war” carried or acquired on active service. An exemption to this would be if the original or later owner was involved in events of historic importance, for example a battle or campaign, and if there is evidence of the involvement of the owner and their firearm;iii. If a firearm is from a historic era and location rarely found in British collections, then the police may wish to consider whether the gun is of historic importance as well as particular rarity;iv. If the police are satisfied that a gun forms part of a genuine and established collection, then they may wish to consider whether a firearm is of historical importance as an integral part of that collection see paragraph 9.18-9.22, bearing in mind that an established collector may have more than one theme to their collection;v. Guns which would be exempt “antiques” under the terms of section 58(2) of the 1968 Act but for their being fired are likely to be of “historic interest” for these purposes but not necessarily so;vi. In most cases guns made before 1919 may be considered of “historic importance” in themselves due to their age and rarity;vii. Conversely, guns manufactured after the Second World War may be less likely to be held to be of historic interest in themselves, in as far as they are more likely to have survived in numbers although numbers surviving were reduced following the handgun ban in the 1997 Act. Nevertheless, as with (vi), there may be special cases which will need to be assessed individually on their merits, as the firearm may be of historic interest to collectors and deserve preservation in its own right. For example, this might include more recent weapons used in Afghanistan or Iraq.Aesthetic quality9.26 This may be taken to mean firearms that differ significantly from factory standard in a way intended to enhance their appearance. This will normally involve substantial enhancement or decoration and at least a fair standard of craftsmanship. An elegant but essentially functional design such as the Colt .45 “Single Action Army” would not generally fall within this heading unless it has had factory or after sales work undertaken to it in order to differentiate it, such as engraving or ornamental grips.9.27 It is not practicable within this exemption to judge the aesthetic standards or tastes of different generations and cultures. A Victorian pistol with elaborate decoration might fall within this category even if it might not conform to contemporary preferences. Note should also be taken of the case of Kendrick v Chief Constable of West Midlands Constabulary (2000) in which a modern presentation gun was held not to be of “aesthetic quality”.72
Guide on Firearms Licensing Law9.28 While opinions are subjective, the police must ensure that a firearm in this category meets objective criteria. This might include evidence that the financial value of the firearm has been significantly raised through its artistic quality, for example from an insurance or other independent valuation.Technical interest9.29 While most firearms will be of some technical interest, it may be taken that the intent of section 7(3) of the 1997 Act is to preserve firearms of especial, rather than common, technical interest. This category might include guns with design features which were distinctive and not widely copied in other guns. For example, the 1893 Borchardt self-loading pistol. It may be expected that most firearms of technical interest would also be of some rarity.9.30 Examples might include guns with unusual mechanisms, such as the Webley Fosbery Selfcocking revolver, the Dardick .38 model 1500 with its triangular rounds or the mechanical repeaters and Lancaster multi-barrelled pistols of the Victorian era. Technical adaptations might include, for example, the Spanish JoLoAr cavalry pistol designed for operation with one hand, or the Finnish Lahti 9mm with its powerful mechanism designed to overcome the effects of Arctic cold.Particular rarity9.31 Section 7(3) of the 1997 Act provides that the firearm must be of particular rarity, rather than merely uncommon. The status of the gun will depend on a number of factors, including any distinctive markings, place of manufacture or service history. Patent and experimental models which were never manufactured in commercial or military quantities would be considered rare, such as the Gabbett Fairfax Mars self- loading pistol or the Mannlicher 7.6mm M1894 self-loading pistol. The condition of the gun and the retention of original accessories would not normally make it rare in itself, but would be a factor to consider in judging the overall status of the gun. If the firearm is from a particular or specific personal commission from a manufacturer this should be considered when judging rarity. Many firearms have increased in rarity since the introduction of the 1997 Act and this should be borne in mind when making decisions relating to rarity.9.32 Collections of historic firearms in the UK include examples of most firearms found worldwide. If a pistol is rarely found in the UK then it will generally be rare in international terms and thus probably worthy of preservation.9.33 The following makes and models of gun from the 1919-1945 period would not normally be considered rare, unless the individual example had clear distinguishing characteristics.9.34 Applications submitted in this category may be considered on their individual merits:Astra:	Models 400, 600 and 900Beretta:	M 1934 pistol in 9mm short and M 1935 pistol in 7.65mmBrowning FN:	Model 1935 (also known as GP, Grand Puissance or High Power) in 9mm ParabellumColt:	Model 1911 in .45 ACP, Model 1903 Pocket Hammerless in.32ACP, Model 1908 in .25ACP, Model 1908 in .380ACP,73
Guide on Firearms Licensing LawModel 1917 revolver in .45”ACP, Official Police, Police Positive, Police Positive Special, Detective SpecialCZ:	M27 7.65mm pistolEnfield:	Service .38 No2 (including Albion-made) revolvers (all marks)Frommer:	Model .37 pistol in 7.65mmLuger:	(see “Parabellum”)MAB:	Model D pistol in 7.65mmMauser:	Model 1934 pistol in .32ACP, Model HS c pistol in .32ACP ‘Parabellum-type’: P 08 nominal 4” barrel 9mm pistol marked S/42 byf(Mauser) Radom:	VIS 35 pistol in 9mm ParabellumSauer:	Model 38 H pistol in 7.65mmSmith & Wesson:	“Military and Police” (K frame) –version in .38 S&W (.38-200)Star:	Model B pistol in 9mm ParabellumTokarev:	Model TT 33 pistol in 7.62mmWalther:	Model 8 pistol in 6.35, Model PP and Model PPK pistols in .32 and .380ACP, P38 pistol in 9mm ParabellumParabellumUnique:	Model 17 pistol (Kriegsmodell)Webley:	Mark IV revolver in .38 S&W (.38-200) calibre, though several variants might qualify as “rare”9.35 Guns made after 1945 may not generally be considered rare or of historic interest in themselves. However, exemptions to this would be models of which only a few examples were made, or now exist in the UK, for example the Jurek, the Sterling revolver and the Victory Arms Co self-loading pistol. Also those incorporating innovative production techniques or designs may be considered rare and therefore warrant preservation.Designated Sites9.36 Sites designated by the Secretary of State under section 7(3) of the 1997 Act for the keeping and use of historic pistols are as follows:i. The National Shooting Centre, Bisley Camp, Surreyii. The Barbican Armoury, Brancepeth Castle, County Durhamiii. The Leicester Shooting Centre, Leicesteriv. The Tameside Shooting Centre, Greater Manchesterv. The Wednesbury Marksmen, West Midlandsvi. Lincolnshire Shooting Centre, Lincolnshirevii. Bedfordshire County Rifle and Pistol Associationviii. Hertfordshire & Essex Shooting Associationix. Valley Arms, Ruthin, Denbighshirex. The Hastings 1066 Rifle & Pistol Club, Sussexxi. Rifleman Firearms Target Shooting Club, Somersetxii. The Marylebone Rifle and Pistol Club, Londonxiii. The Target Sports Centre, Dorset9.37 Further sites may be designated in due course.9.38 Section 7(3) does not authorise the possession of firearms outside the designated site. If the owner wishes to remove the gun (for example to transfer it to another74
Guide on Firearms Licensing Lawdesignated site) this will normally require a carrier holding the Secretary of State’s authority under section 5 and prior police authority to amend the certificate conditions stipulating the new designated site or “at home” if the gun is a firearm falling within section 7(1) that had been held at a designated site and is being removed by the owner. Also where a section 7(3) firearm is of a type that could be held as a firearm within the definition in section 58(2) of the 1968 Act, but for the fact of it being held for firing at a designated site, the status of the firearm can be changed back to section 58(2) so as to allow the owner to remove it from the designated site. This change in status also applies to firearms that qualify for section 7(1) of the 1997 Act so that they can also be transported by their owners. The change in status will require the permission of the licensing authority prior to the movement of the firearms. The change in status of such a firearm should be made by a letter to the licensing authority.9.39 The main purpose of section 7(3) of the 1997 Act is to allow guns of historic interest to be preserved and studied, including occasional shooting. It is not intended to allow for competitive target shooting, and nor is there any obligation on owners to fire their guns or regularly visit the site.Dealers9.40 Registered firearms dealers who wish to trade in historic handguns will need to obtain authority from the Secretary of State under section 5 of the 1968 Act.Ammunition9.41 It must be noted that the section 7(3) exemption does not cover ammunition. Therefore a section 5 authority under the 1968 Act would be needed for prohibited ammunition and a firearm certificate would be required for ammunition within section 1(1)(b) of that Act. Most handgun ammunition will fall within section 1. Where a certificate holder wishes to fire their firearm held under section 7(3) of the 1997 Act, the ammunition for that firearm should be kept at the designated site. However, where the certificate holder does not possess any section 7(1) handguns in that chambering, section 1 ammunition may be held at home. The certificate should be so conditioned.9.42 If the ammunition is not easily available, then arrangements can be made for the certificate holder to “hand load” at the site. The basic machinery (usually a single stage press) for this will be provided at the site but the appropriate dies, powders, primers, bullets and cartridge cases should be supplied by the certificate holder. Where ammunition is available, then arrangements should be made for it to be transferred to the site by the supplier for the use of the certificate holder. Home loading of ammunition for firearms falling under section 7(3) of the 1997 Act should be possible if the certificate holder does not also hold a firearm falling under section 7(1) of that Act in the same chambering.75
Guide on Firearms Licensing LawChapter 10: Firearm Certificate Procedure10.1 This chapter provides an overview of the firearm certification procedure. It should be read alongside the Statutory Guidance for Chief Officers of Police.10.2 Firearms law and licensing is in place to allow the legitimate possession and use of firearms by those judged safe to do so. The overarching consideration in all firearms licensing is public safety. Please see Chapter 11 for the certificate procedure for shot guns.Application10.3 Unless exempt from the certificate requirement, persons who wish to possess, purchase or acquire firearms or ammunition to which section 1 of the 1968 Act applies should complete the prescribed application form (Form 201). By virtue of the Rehabilitation of Offenders Act 1974 (Exemptions) Order 1975, the provisions of the Rehabilitation of Offenders Act 1974 do not apply to an applicant for a firearm certificate. An applicant is, therefore, not entitled to withhold information about a previous conviction on the grounds that it is for other purposes spent under the 1974 Act. This includes motoring offences, bind overs, cautions and convictions in and outside Great Britain, and (by virtue of the Rehabilitation of Offenders Act 1974 (Exceptions) Order 1975) convictions which are spent under the 1974 Act. A conditional discharge and an absolute discharge both count as convictions for this purpose. Details of fixed penalty notices and parking offences do not need to be declared.10.4 Applicants are required to enter the calibre and type of firearm(s) and ammunition to be purchased or acquired. The information will normally need to be specific and not cover a range of calibres or a generic group such as .22 CF (centrefire). Form 201 does not require the serial number to be given of the firearm(s) that the applicant wishes to purchase or acquire, as this information is not normally available. There is an exception to this: applicants may include, where available, the identification number of a handgun being acquired under section 7(1) or section 7(3) of the 1997 Act. Normally, the identification number or other identifying mark will be entered by the transferor in Table One at the back of the firearm certificate.10.5 The 1998 Rules, as provided for in section 26(2) of the 1968 Act, require an application for the grant or renewal of a firearm certificate to be accompanied by one photograph. Ordinary passport style photographs (sized 45mm x 35mm) are suitable for this purpose. A digital photograph must be used for online applications.10.6 Where the applicant is under 18, any enquiry should normally be conducted in the presence of a legal guardian. Where this is not reasonably possible, for example with a student at a boarding school, another responsible adult must be present and the parents or guardian should be consulted.76
Guide on Firearms Licensing LawRepresentatives of Foreign States and Commonwealth countries10.7 A person who enjoys diplomatic privilege, whether representing a government or international organisation, is expected to hold a certificate in respect of any firearm to which section 1 of the 1968 Act applies, which is used or carried outside the confines of the embassy, consulate or similar establishment. The principles which normally govern the granting of certificates should be observed. The Diplomatic Privileges Act 1964 and the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations 1961 exempt diplomats from payment of the certificate fee. Diplomatic privileges have also been extended to some international bodies, for example the International Maritime Organisation. Any enquiries about the status of such an organisation or its employees should be referred to the International Organisations Team, Diplomatic Missions and International Organisations Unit, Protocol Directorate, Foreign and Commonwealth Office.Prescribed Conditions10.8 The Firearms Rules 1998 prescribe certain conditions subject to which firearm certificates shall be held, the main object of which is to impress upon certificate holders the importance of ensuring the safe custody of firearms and ammunition. Failure to comply with certain conditions may result in revocation, however each case must be determined on its merits. A firearm certificate shall be granted or renewed subject to the following conditions:(i) the holder must, on receipt of the certificate, sign it in ink with his/her usual signature;(ii) the holder of the certificate must, inform the chief officer of police by whom it was granted as soon as reasonably practicable, but within 7 days of the theft, loss or destruction in Great Britain of the certificate and/or the theft or loss, deactivation or destruction of any firearms to which this certificate relates and/or the theft or loss of ammunition to which this certificate relates;(iii) the certificate holder must, without undue delay, notify any change of permanent address to the chief officer of police who granted the certificate;(iv) a fourth condition relates to the safe custody of firearms and ammunition and is as follows:a) the firearms and ammunition to which the certificate relates must at all times (except in the circumstances set out in paragraph b) below) be stored securely so as to prevent, so far as is reasonably practicable, access to the firearms or ammunition by an unauthorised person;b) where a firearm or ammunition to which the certificate relates is in use or the holder of the certificate has the firearm with him/her for the purpose of cleaning, repairing or testing it or for some other purpose in connection with its use, transfer or sale, or the firearm or ammunition is in transit to or from such a place in connection with its77
Guide on Firearms Licensing Lawuse or for any other purpose, reasonable precautions must be taken for the safe custody of the firearms or ammunition;c) where the holder of the certificate is under the age of eighteen, arrangements must be in place for ensuring that either the holder’s parent or guardian or a person aged eighteen or over who is authorised under the principal Act to have possession of such firearms and ammunition to which the certificate relates assumes responsibility for the secure storage requirements set out at a) above.10.9 See also Chapter 18 concerning the security of firearms and ammunition.Conditions attached by chief officers of police10.10 Section 27(2) of the 1968 Act gives the chief officer of police powers to attach conditions to firearm certificates where necessary. In the case of 'R v Wakefield Crown Court ex parte Oldfield (1978)' the court gave expression to the common law requirement that a person must exercise individual judgement in all cases. Section 29(1) of the 1968 Act gives the chief officer power to vary, by a notice in writing, any such condition not prescribed by the rules made by the Secretary of State. The notice may require the holder to deliver the certificate to the chief officer within twenty-one days for the purpose of amending the conditions. The certificate may be revoked if the holder fails to comply with such a requirement.10.11 Possible conditions which may be applied are listed at Appendix 3 as a guide to firearms licensing officers. They should only be used, where the individual circumstances require it for public safety. Exceptionally, chief officers of police may impose other conditions appropriate to individual circumstances. As the courts have held ('R v Cambridge Crown Court ex parte Buckland, 1998') that there is no right of appeal against the imposition of conditions (as opposed to a refusal to grant or renew a certificate) chief officers will wish to be cautious in imposing conditions that might amount to a constructive refusal to grant or renew a certificate, that is, additional conditions that would make possession or use so difficult as to be redundant in practice. There is a right of appeal against a decision to refuse to vary the existing conditions attached to a firearm certificate (section 29 of the 1968 Act), but not against the initial decision to impose conditions.10.12 Every effort must be made to limit the number of additional conditions imposed on a firearm certificate and ensure that they are not contradictory. Care should be taken, however, to ensure that all ‘good reasons’ for which a firearm is possessed are allowed for, for instance stalking and target shooting.10.13 There is no requirement to establish ‘good reason’ for additional conditions or the addition of quarry species to an existing condition where ‘good reason’ already exists for the possession of a firearm in the first instance (see Chapter 12). Firearms should be conditioned to provide flexibility with quarry shooting by allowing all lawful quarry (see Appendix 3).10.14 Conditions setting out arbitrary time limits for acquiring firearms and ammunition should not be imposed. However, the chief officer may during the life of a certificate or at the time of certificate renewal enquire why an authority to acquire has not78
Guide on Firearms Licensing Lawbeen exercised and consider that part of the renewal in the light of the reason given. It should be borne in mind that a collector may face difficulty in finding examples of collectible or heritage firearms suitable for their collections and that a time limit should not apply where reasonable attempts to procure the firearm(s) concerned are being or have been made.10.15 Chief officers of police are empowered to impose conditions if they think that the circumstances of the individual case mean that the condition is necessary to ensure the effective operation of the firearms controls and to minimise the risk to public safety. Forces should note that those conditions relating to otherwise prohibited firearms and ammunition such as expanding ammunition for pistols are statutory. The chief officer does not have discretion to grant a certificate for such firearms and ammunition beyond the terms of the statutory exemptions for these items.Territorial Conditions on use10.16 A territorial condition restricts the areas where a firearm may be used by a person who holds a firearm for sporting purposes or for the shooting of problem wildlife It is important that there should be standardisation of practice amongst forces and for this purpose it is recommended that new certificate holders should be limited to land considered suitable by the chief officer. When a chief officer is satisfied that a certificate holder has gained sufficient competence with a particular calibre or class of firearm the less restrictive condition may be considered appropriate (see Appendix 3). In all circumstances the “any lawful quarry condition” should be applied (see Appendix 3).Land Inspection10.17 This is covered in detail in Chapter 12.Zeroing10.18 Zeroing is the process of adjusting the sights of a rifle so that the aim corresponds to the mean point of impact at the chosen distance. When the sights are harmonised, the bullet impacts where the shooter is aiming. Any small change either to the rifle or to the ammunition used will change the impact point of the bullet and necessitate re-zeroing. Those managing wildlife must be allowed to zero their equipment. The relevant parts of the appropriate condition in Appendix 3 should be added to a certificate of somebody who is permitted to possess a firearm for these purposes.(Section 1) Smooth-bore guns10.19 In the case of an application in respect of a smooth-bore gun to which section 1 of the 1968 Act applies, it will not be necessary for specific areas of land over which the applicant has permission to shoot to be examined where section 2 shot gun cartridges are used. See Appendix 3 for relevant conditions for shooting of vermin, practical target shooting disciplines or other forms of target shooting.Completion of Certificates10.20 Firearm certificates must be to the like effect of Form 202. The following parts of the certificate are to be completed by the police before it is sent to the applicant:79
Guide on Firearms Licensing Law(a) the number of the certificate;(b) the commencement and expiry dates of the period of validity. A firearm certificate is valid for a period of five years;(c) the name and address of the holder;(d) the date of birth of the holder;(e) the details (including the description or identification number where known) of each of the firearms in the applicant’s possession;(f) the details of each of the firearms the applicant is authorised to acquire;(g) the amount of ammunition the applicant is authorised to possess;(h) any such conditions which pertain to the firearms or ammunition to which the certificate relates;(i) the official crest of the police force issuing the certificate together with the signature of the chief officer of police; and(j) Owing to the differences in the firearms licensing database used in Scotland, the firearm certificate issued there is slightly different to those issued in England and Wales. The content of the certificate in both jurisdictions, however, is identical. This difference is allowed for under rule 2(f) of the Firearms Rules 1998.10.21 The certificate does not require the identification numbers of those firearms authorised to be purchased or acquired to be entered, (see paragraph 10.4).10.22 If there are a number of people with good reason to share property and a gun cabinet, permission can be provided to all parties to acquire. In these circumstances, the buyer/ recipient should have the seller/donor complete Table I of his/her certificate. It is the buyer’s responsibility to endorse the certificates of all those who have shared access/joint ownership. All individuals with shared access/joint ownership will need to arrange for their certificates to be amended accordingly. Notification is still required on every written transfer.10.23 The certificate requires the following entry as to ammunition:- the maximum amount authorised to be possessed at any one time.Renewals10.24 According to section 27(3) of the 1968 Act, the test for renewal of a firearm certificate is the same as the test for the grant, i.e. the test in section 27(1). Section 28A(1) of the same Act states that the certificate shall continue in force for 5 years from the date when it was granted or last renewed. Thus, the wording of section 28A(1) means that the 5 years start to run from the date when the certificate was granted or renewed, not from the date when the previous certificate elapsed.80
Guide on Firearms Licensing LawLimited extension of certificates10.25 Where an application is made to the police for the renewal of a certificate at least 8 weeks before the certificate is due to expire, but the police are unable to decide the application before the certificate expires, section 28B of the 1968 Act automatically extends the validity of the certificate for a period of 8 weeks or until the police decide the application, whichever occurs first. The certificate’s terms and conditions will continue to apply during this period. Changes have been made to police IT systems to support the administration of this provision and to facilitate police forces generating a confirmatory letter to applicants who benefit from an extension under section 28B.10.26 In the event that the application for renewal is subsequently granted, any period for which the certificate continued in force under section 28B will be treated for the purposes of section 28A(1) as part of the period for which the renewed certificate is in force, meaning that the total renewal period of a renewed certificate would be 5 years.10.27 In the event that the application for renewal cannot be determined before the extended certificate expires, police forces may continue to issue a temporary permit to the applicant under section 7 of the Firearms Act 1968 authorising their continued possession of firearms and ammunition to which the expired certificate applies. Section 7 permits issued in these circumstances can allow for the continued possession of the firearms and ammunition that are specified on the applicant’s expired certificate but not the acquisition or purchase of additional firearms or ammunition.Coterminous certificates10.28 Section 11 of the Firearms (Amendment) Act 1988 allows the life of a shot gun certificate to be reduced so that it expires on the same date as the applicant’s firearm certificate. A reduced fee is payable so long as the shot gun certificate is renewed and made coterminous at the grant or renewal of a firearm certificate. There is no reduced fee when the applicant is applying for grant or renewal of a shot gun certificate but requests the expiry date to coincide with the firearm certificate expiry date.Replacement and renewal of certificates granted in another police area10.29 A certificate is renewed by the chief officer of police for the area in which the holder resides (section 28A(1) of the 1968 Act). If applicants are staying only temporarily in a police area and reside elsewhere, they should be referred to the chief officer of police of the area of their usual residence. If an applicant has residences in different police force areas, it is for the individual to decide which force issues their certificate. However, one police force will not normally issue a firearm certificate and another shot gun certificate for the same individual.81
Guide on Firearms Licensing Law10.30 Resident usually means having accommodation available for use, and not, for example, rented out (Burdett v Joslin, Chief Constable Warwickshire). HM Forces personnel stationed abroad would not normally be issued with a certificate as they are not resident in one particular force area. As above, their parents’ or other family address would only be acceptable where it is available for their use. The case of Mills-Owens v Chief Constable of the Hampshire Constabulary (2003) is authority for the proposition that a person can have more than one residence, but residence at any particular home has to be established on the facts of a particular case by evidence.10.31 Where a certificate holder moves to another police area, the chief officer of police who receives notification of the change of address should send the complete records to the chief officer for the area to which the certificate holder has moved. The chief officer of the force area that the person has moved to should amend the certificate and inspect the security of the new premises. When notification of a change of address to another police area is received, the chief officer of police of that area should be sent the relevant documents, or copies of them, and a reference to the removal should be retained by the issuing force. The certificate holder should retain the original certificate until such time as the new force is able to issue a replacement whereupon it should be exchanged.Replacement certificates10.32 Section 32 of the 1968 Act states that a fee is payable to replace a certificate which has been lost or destroyed. A certificate should be replaced without fee if it is very dirty, mutilated, or lacks space for further legible entries to be made. The old certificate should not be returned to the holder.Application for variations (section 29(2) of the 1968 Act)10.33 If a certificate holder wants to vary the certificate allowing them to possess or acquire firearms or ammunition, they must apply to the chief officer of police who issued the certificate.10.34 The application form for the variation of a firearm certificate (Form 201V) should be used for applications to vary a certificate. The certificate holder should submit their firearm certificate, along with the completed Form 201V, and, where appropriate, the fee, to the firearms licensing department. A fee is payable only in respect of variations which increase the number of firearms to which the certificate relates: if the holder wishes to dispose of one firearm and replace it with another then no fee is payable. It is not normally necessary to re-examine the applicant’s circumstances, but this may be necessary in individual cases. Although no time limit is normally placed on acquiring the firearm to which the variation applies, failure to do so over a reasonable period, without good reason, may be taken as lack of genuine intention. As referred to in 10.14, chief officers should take into account any difficulties collectors may face in finding examples of collectible or heritage firearms suitable for their collections. Time limits should not apply where reasonable attempts to procure the firearm(s) concerned are being or have been made.10.35 Each case should be dealt with on its merits and, provided that the “good reason” and security requirement is met for each firearm, no general limit82
Guide on Firearms Licensing Lawshould be applied in considering any of the following (“good reason” should not be confined to need nor equated with desire – see Chapter 12):a) number of rounds of ammunition to be held (but see broad guidelines on ammunition amounts in Chapter 12);b) total number of firearms to be held;c) number of firearms per calibre; ord) time by which firearms should be purchased.“One for one” variations10.36 A variation is always necessary if a certificate holder wishes to change one of the firearms, even if they wish to purchase one identical to the one they are selling (Wilson v Coombe, Queen’s Bench Divisional Court, July 1988). “One for one” variation refers to firearms that are authorised to be acquired following the disposal of a firearm or a request to change an existing authority to acquire. There is no set time in which the certificate holder must apply for a replacement authority once their firearm is disposed of. The keeping of open authorities indefinitely should be discouraged, subject to a collector seeking particular firearms. Applications for “one for one” variations should be made by the certificate holder submitting their firearm certificate together with a completed Form 201V to the police firearms licensing department. Such variations are processed free of charge. In most cases, it will not be necessary to re-examine the applicant’s circumstances. Further enquiries will be necessary, however, if for example the application is for a change of use or for a full-bore firearm when the holder’s shooting club only has facilities for small-bore shooting.Variation/Renewal10.37 Police forces can consider whether to renew a certificate when an application for variation is made near to the certificate expiry date, that is, within two months. The certificate runs from 5 years from the date on which it was granted or last renewed. Variations requested at the time of renewal do not attract a fee.Revocations and Cancellations10.38 A firearm certificate may be revoked by the chief officer of police for the area in which the holder resides, on the grounds specified in section 30A(2)-(5) of the 1968 Act. The courts also have the power under section 52(1) of the 1968 Act to cancel certificates. Forces must give specific reasons for their decision to revoke a firearm certificate. Section 30A(6) of the 1968 Act provides a right of appeal against the decision to revoke in accordance with section 44 of the same Act.10.39 Where police forces have serious concerns about a certificate holder’s continued access to firearms prompt action must be taken to ensure no preventable harm is caused to public safety. This may involve the certificate holder being invited to voluntarily surrender their firearms, ammunition and certificate pending a review of83
Guide on Firearms Licensing Lawtheir continued suitability to be issued with a firearm certificate. Such a review should be carried out expeditiously, with the certificate holder informed of the progress. Should the enquiry have the result that there is no danger to the public safety, the firearms, ammunition and certificates should be returned as soon as practicable. Care should be taken in the transport and storage of guns concerned, which may have considerable monetary value in some cases.10.40 When chief officers of police revoke certificates they must serve on the holder a written notice requiring them either to:a) surrender their certificate within 21 days of the date of the notice (or the date of the abandonment or dismissal of the appeal against revocation); or where the chief officer considers that the circumstances of the case justify itb) surrender forthwith their certificate and any firearms and ammunition in their possession by virtue of the certificate as set out in section 12 of the Firearms (Amendment) Act 1988.10.41 Sections 42A, 42B and 56 of the 1968 Act reflect that any notice to be given under that Act to a person may be given by signed for and special delivery post or by electronic means such as email or fax. A certificate holder who fails to comply with such a notice is liable to a penalty. Where email is used as a means of notification, it is good practice to request acknowledgement of receipt in order to confirm safe receipt. Personal service of the notice to revoke, whenever practicable, gives the person an opportunity to discuss the matter and might help to reduce the number of appeals to the Crown Court.10.42 When a certificate has been cancelled by a court order under section 52 of the 1968 Act, or revoked by the chief officer of police after the holder has failed to comply with a notice under section 29(1) of the 1968 Act (requiring them to deliver up the certificate for variation), the chief officer must send the holder a notice in writing (see above). Under section 12(1) of the 1988 Act, a chief officer may only send a notice which requires the recipient to comply with it immediately after the firearm certificate has been revoked on the grounds specified in section 30A(2)-(4) of the 1968 Act (as amended). Revocation on these grounds does not preclude the use of option (a), and it should only be necessary to use option (b) when a delay in the certificate holder relinquishing their certificate and firearms would pose a direct danger to themselves, public safety or to the peace. Section 12(1) should not be used where firearms and certificates are already in police possession.10.43 Under section 30B of the 1968 Act, chief officers of police may partially revoke certificates, that is to say revoke those parts of certificates that relate to the possession or acquisition of particular firearms or ammunition, if they are satisfied that the holder no longer has a “good reason” for having in his possession, or for purchasing or acquiring, the firearms or ammunition concerned to which the partial revocation relates. Where this is necessary, the chief officer should normally give notice of intention, as they would with a full revocation, citing the reasons for the revocation. Note that there is no power of partial “refusal to renew”. The section 12(1) power will be applicable if there is a revocation under 30A(2),(3) or (4) or section 30C after a partial revocation under section 30B. But if there has only been a partial revocation under section 30B, then the power in section 12(1) of the 1988 Act won’t apply. Section 12(1) is expressed as a discretion i.e. the chief officer of84
Guide on Firearms Licensing Lawpolice may require the certificate holder to surrender the certificate and firearms immediately, but the chief officer of police is not duty bound to do so.10.44 The certificate holder has a right of appeal and the police can only retain the firearms and ammunition if they have been surrendered due to a notice served under section 12(1) of the 1988 Act. Otherwise the firearms and ammunition will need to be released during an appeal period to a suitably authorised person acting on behalf of the owner. Section 12(1) of the 1988 Act does not apply in a case where the certificate has been partially revoked under section 30B of the 1968 Act. If the appeal against revocation succeeds, any firearms and ammunition surrendered by virtue of section 12(1) must be returned to the appellant at the earliest opportunity. On the dismissal of an appeal, the court may make such order for disposal of any surrendered firearm as it thinks fit. Unless such an order is made, the applicant retains title to the firearms. Care should be taken in the transport and storage of guns concerned, which may have considerable monetary value in some cases.10.45 If no appeal is brought, or if the appeal is abandoned, the firearms and ammunition should be disposed of in a manner agreed with the owner, who retains title. In the absence of an agreement chief officers of police must take all reasonable steps to ensure the guns are deposited with a suitably authorised person so that the owner can decide on whether to store or realise value etc. Disposals and failure to take reasonable steps may leave chief officers liable to charges of conversion. Should all reasonable avenues be exhausted, the police must then give the owner notice in writing of how they intend to dispose of the firearms and ammunition and the owner may appeal against the decision of revocation or partial revocation in accordance with section 44 of the 1968 Act. The court may then either dismiss the appeal or make such order as to the disposal of the firearms and ammunition as it thinks fit. In all cases, the police should keep records of how and where firearms have been disposed.Police Records and Procedures10.46 In England and Wales, police forces use National Firearms Licensing Management System (NFLMS) to administer firearms licensing. Police forces can record on NFLMS the nominal details of all applicants and certificate holders and the status of those certificates including firearms possessed and further details such as how they are stored. It should be noted that whilst NFLMS is the system used in England and Wales, this does not apply in Scotland. In the event of a certificate holders’ death, a permit in order to dispose of the certificated arms may be issued to the Executor or their nominated agent.10.47 If there is an appeal, the fact and result should be noted on NFLMS. Results of police inquiries and intelligence information relevant to the certificate holder’s circumstances should be integrated within the records. Care should be taken to ensure consistency in recording the types of firearms. If a firearm certificate is revoked (section 30A of the 1968 Act, as updated by section 40 of the 1997 Act) or cancelled (section 52(1) of the 1968 Act), this should, be reflected on NFLMS.10.48 It may not always be practicable to recover the certificate where an individual has gone abroad. If the certificates are recovered, the records can be restricted to what may be worth keeping permanently, but the certificate should first be checked85
Guide on Firearms Licensing Lawagainst the record and against any notices of sale received under sections 32 to 35 of the 1997 Act.86
Guide on Firearms Licensing LawChapter 11: Shot gun Certificate Procedure11.1 This chapter provides an overview of the shot gun certificate procedure. It should be read alongside the Statutory Guidance for Chief Officers of Police.Introduction11.2 Shot gun certificates are the mechanism for licensing smooth-bore guns that do not require firearm certificates (see Chapter 2). The shot gun certificate differs from the firearm certificate in that it authorises a person to have in their possession, purchase, or to acquire, an unlimited number of shot guns without the need for approval in respect of individual guns.11.3 The certificate must specify the description of the shot guns to which it relates, including, if known, the identification number of the guns. Shot guns held on loan for less than 72 hours do not have to be entered on Table 2 of the certificate, nor does notification of temporary transfer have to be given by either party.11.4 Although a shot gun certificate is not required in order to possess or acquire shot gun cartridges used with section 2 shot guns, the production of a certificate (the original not a photocopy) is necessary as required by section 5 of the Firearms (Amendment) Act 1988 (see paragraph 5.14) in order to purchase such cartridges (unless the purchaser can show that they are entitled to possess a shot gun without a certificate, is a registered firearms dealer, or is a person who sells such cartridges by way of trade or business). Ammunition not exempted by section 1(4) of the 1968 Act may be possessed or acquired only by a firearm certificate holder. A person may purchase shot gun ammunition for a certificate holder, if they produce that person’s certificate, together with written authority from the certificate holder to purchase the ammunition for them. Note that this section (section 5 of the 1988 Act) only applies to sales.Application11.5 An application for a shot gun certificate must be made in the prescribed form (Form 201) to the chief officer of police for the area in which the applicant resides. By virtue of the Rehabilitation of Offenders Act 1974 (Exemptions) Order 1975, the provisions of the Rehabilitation of Offenders Act 1974 do not apply to an applicant for a shot gun certificate. An applicant is, therefore, not entitled to withhold information about a previous conviction on the grounds that it is for other purposes spent under the 1974 Act. This includes motoring offences, bind overs, cautions and convictions in and outside Great Britain, and (by virtue of the Rehabilitation of Offenders Act 1974 (Exceptions) Order 1975) convictions which are spent under the 1974 Act. A conditional discharge and an absolute discharge both count as convictions for this purpose. Details of fixed penalty notices and parking offences do not need to be declared.87
Guide on Firearms Licensing Law11.6 The application form does not require applicants to provide details of the shot guns to be purchased or acquired, though an applicant for renewal must give details of the guns currently possessed. It is a legal requirement to send a notification of a transaction involving a shot gun to the firearms licensing department via recorded or permitted electronic means within seven days of the transfer. See also paragraph 11.3 regarding 72 hour loan.11.7 The Firearms Rules 1998, as provided for in section 26(2) of the 1968 Act, require an application for the grant or renewal of a shot gun certificate to be accompanied by one photograph. Ordinary passport style photographs (sized 45mm x 35mm) are suitable for this purpose. A digital photograph must be used for online applications.11.8 An applicant is informed in the notes on the form that unless instructed otherwise by the police, they should post or take the completed form with the fee and photograph to their local police firearms licensing department.Conditions on Shot gun Certificates11.9 Section 28(2)(a) of the 1968 Act provides that a shot gun certificate shall be granted or renewed subject to any prescribed conditions and no others. The 1998 Rules as amended, together with other relevant provisions set out on the certificate, provide that a shot gun certificate shall be granted or renewed subject to the following conditions:(i) the holder must, on receipt of the certificate, sign it in ink with his/her usual signature;(ii) the holder of the certificate must, inform the chief officer of police by whom it was granted as soon as reasonably practicable, but within 7 days of the theft, loss or destruction in Great Britain of the certificate and/or the theft or loss, deactivation or destruction of any shot guns to which this certificate relates;(iii) the holder of the certificate must, without undue delay, inform the chief officer of police by whom the certificate was granted of any change in his/her permanent address;(iv) ?a) that any shot gun to which the certificate relates must at all times (except in the circumstances set out at (b) below) be stored securely so as to prevent, as far as is reasonably practicable, access to the shot guns by an unauthorised person;b) where a shot gun to which the certificate relates is in use or the holder of the certificate has the shot gun with him/her for the purpose of cleaning, repairing or testing it or for some other purpose connected with its use, transfer or sale, or the gun is in transit to or from a place in connection with its use or any such purpose, reasonable precautions must be taken for the safe custody of the gun (see Chapter 18 for additional information);88
Guide on Firearms Licensing Lawc) where the holder of the certificate is under the age of eighteen, arrangements must be in place for ensuring that either the holder’s parent or guardian or a person aged eighteen or over who is authorised under the principal Act to have possession of such shot guns to which the certificate relates assumes responsibility for the secure storage requirements set out at a) above.11.10 The prescribed conditions for shot gun certificates are similar to those prescribed for firearm certificates. When notification of a change of address to another police area is received, the chief officer of police of that area should be sent the relevant documents, or copies of them, and a reference to the removal should be retained by the issuing force. The certificate holder should retain the original certificate until such time as the new force is able to issue a replacement whereupon it should be exchanged.11.11 It should be noted that chief officers of police are not empowered (as they are with firearm certificates) to impose any conditions of their own on shot gun certificates. However, rule 5(5) of the 1998 Rules and section 5A(3) of the 1968 Act (as amended) provides that when a shot gun which is disguised as another object, is possessed, purchased or acquired by the holder of a shot gun certificate for the purpose only of its being kept or exhibited as part of a collection, the certificate shall be subject to an additional condition restricting the use of that shot gun to use for that purpose. The most common shot gun of this kind will be the walking-stick shot gun or the umbrella shot gun.Completion of certificates11.12 Shot gun certificates must be in the prescribed form (Form 204). The following parts of the certificate are to be completed by the police before it is sent to an applicant:a) the number of the certificate;b) the commencement and expiry dates of the period of validity. A shot gun certificate is normally valid for a period of five years (but see paragraph 11.16 about coterminous certificates);c) the name and address of the holder;d) the date of birth of the holder;e) the details (including the description or identification number where known) of each of the shot guns currently in the applicant’s possession; andf) the official crest of the police force issuing the certificate together with the signature of the chief officer of police and the date when the certificate was issued.89
Guide on Firearms Licensing LawLimited extension of certificates11.13 Where an application is made to the police for the renewal of a certificate at least 8 weeks before the certificate is due to expire, but the police are unable to decide the application before the certificate expires, section 28B of the 1968 Act automatically extends the validity of the certificate for a period of 8 weeks or until the police decide the application, whichever occurs first. The certificate’s terms and conditions will continue to apply during this period. Changes have been made to the National Firearms Licensing Management System (NFLMS) to support the administration of this provision and to facilitate police forces generating a confirmatory letter to applicants who benefit from an extension under section 28B.11.14 In the event that the application for renewal is subsequently granted, any period for which the certificate continued in force under section 28B will be treated for the purposes of section 28A(1) as part of the period for which the renewed certificate is in force, meaning that the total renewal period of a renewed certificate would be 5 years.11.15 In the event that the application for renewal cannot be determined before the extended certificate expires, police forces may continue to issue a temporary permit to the applicant under section 7 of the Firearms Act 1968 authorising their continued possession of firearms and ammunition to which the expired certificate applies. Section 7 permits issued in these circumstances can allow for the continued possession of the firearms and ammunition that are specified on the applicant’s expired certificate but not the acquisition or purchase of additional firearms or ammunition.Coterminous certificates11.16 Section 11 of the Firearms (Amendment) Act 1988 provides for chief officers of police to grant or renew a shot gun certificate for a period such that it will expire at the same time as the holder’s firearm certificate. The purpose of this provision is to enable both renewal procedures to be carried out at the same time, with a consequent saving to the police and the certificate holder. A firearm certificate holder applying for the grant or renewal of a shot gun certificate can therefore request that it is issued with the same expiry date as their firearm certificate. Alternatively, where shot gun certificate holders apply for the grant or renewal of a firearm certificate, they should be advised that they may surrender their shot gun certificate and apply for a new one at the reduced fee to take effect on the same day as the firearm certificate.Replacement certificates11.17 Section 32 of the 1968 Act states that a fee is payable to replace a certificate which has been lost or destroyed. A certificate should be replaced without fee if it is very dirty, mutilated, or lacks space for further legible entries to be made. The old certificate should not be returned to the holder.90
Revocations and Cancellations
Guide on Firearms Licensing Law
11.18 Where police forces have serious concerns about a certificate holder’s continued access to shot guns, prompt action must be taken to ensure no preventable harm is caused to public safety. This may involve the certificate holder being invited to voluntarily surrender their shot guns and certificate pending a review of their continued suitability to be issued with a shot gun certificate. Such a review should be carried out expeditiously, with the certificate holder informed of the progress. Should the enquiry have the result that there is no danger to the public safety, the guns and certificates should be returned as soon as practicable. Care should be taken in the transport and storage of guns concerned.11.19 Under section 30C(1) of the 1968 Act, a shot gun certificate may be revoked by the chief officer of police if they are satisfied that the holder cannot be permitted to possess a shot gun without danger to public safety or to the peace. A chief officer must revoke a certificate held by a person who has become prohibited under the terms of section 21 of the 1968 Act. Forces will be expected to give reasons for their decisions to revoke a shot gun certificate. The courts also have the power under section 52(1) of the 1968 Act to cancel certificates. Section 30(C)(2) of the 1968 Act provides for a right of appeal against the decision to revoke.11.20 When the chief officer of police revokes a certificate they must send the holder a notice in writing requiring them to either:(a) surrender the certificate within 21 days of the date of the notice (or the date of the abandonment or dismissal of any appeal against revocation); or where the chief officer considers that the circumstances of the case justify it,(b) surrender the certificate and any shot guns held by virtue of the certificate forthwith (as per section 12 of the 1988 Act).11.21 Sections 42A, 42B and 56 of the 1968 Act reflect that any notice to be given under that Act to a person may be given by ‘signed for’ and ‘special delivery’ postal service, or by electronic means such as email or fax. A certificate holder who fails to comply with such a notice (if received) is liable to a penalty. Personal service of the notice to revoke, whenever practicable, gives the person an opportunity to discuss the matter and might help to reduce the number of appeals to the Crown Court or, in the case of Scotland, the Sheriff Court.11.22 When a revocation notice is served, the certificate holder’s right of appeal against revocation is unaffected. Under section 12(1) of the 1988 Act, a chief officer may only send a notice which requires the recipient to comply with it immediately after the shot gun certificate has been revoked on the grounds specified in section 30C(1) of the 1968 Act (as amended). Revocation on these grounds does not preclude the use of option (a), and it should only be necessary to use option (b) when a delay in the certificate holder relinquishing their certificate and shot guns would pose a direct danger to themselves, public safety or to the peace. Section 12(1) should not be used where shot guns and certificates are already in police possession.11.23 The certificate holder has a right of appeal and the police can only retain the shot guns if they have been surrendered due to notice being served in terms of section 12(1) of the 1988 Act, otherwise the shot guns will need to be released during an91
Guide on Firearms Licensing Lawappeal period to a suitably authorised person acting on behalf of the owner at the earliest opportunity. Care should be taken in the transport and storage of guns concerned, which may have considerable monetary value in some cases. If the appeal against revocation succeeds, any shot guns surrendered under section 12(1) must be returned to the successful appellant. On the dismissal of an appeal, the court may make such order for disposal of any shot guns surrendered under section 12(1) as it thinks fit. It must be remembered however that unless such an order is made, the applicant retains title to the shot guns.11.24 If no appeal is brought, or if the appeal is abandoned, the shot guns should be disposed of in a manner agreed with the owner, who retains title. In the absence of an agreement chief officers of police must take all reasonable steps to ensure the guns are deposited with a suitably authorised person so that the owner may decide on whether to store or realise value etc. Disposals and failure to take reasonable steps may leave chief officers liable to charges of conversion. Should all reasonable avenues be exhausted, the police must then give the owner notice in writing of how they intend to dispose of the shot guns and the owner may appeal against the decision in accordance with section 44 of the 1968 Act. The court may then either dismiss the appeal or make such order as to the disposal of the shot guns as it thinks fit. In all cases, the police should keep records of how and where shot guns have been disposed.Police Records11.25 The general guidance set out in Chapter 10 in respect of firearm certificates also applies in respect of shot gun certificates. In particular, chief officers of police should operate a system under which details of the shot guns acquired and possessed by certificate holders can be recorded. The National Firearms Licensing Management System (NFLMS) is used by all Police Forces in England and Wales for the administration of applications made under the Firearms Acts. In the event of a certificate holder’s death, a Permit in order to dispose of the certificated arms will be issued to the Executor or their nominated agent.Visitors11.26 The acquisition of shot guns for export without a certificate and visitors’ shot gun permits are dealt with in chapters 6 and 26 respectively.Representatives of Foreign States and Commonwealth countries11.27 A person who enjoys diplomatic privilege, whether representing a government or international organisation, is expected to hold a certificate in respect of any shot gun to which section 2 of the 1968 Act applies, which is used or carried outside the confines of the embassy, consulate or similar establishment. The principles which normally govern the granting of certificates should be observed. The Diplomatic Privileges Act 1964 and the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations 1961 exempt diplomats from payment of the certificate fee. Diplomatic privileges have also been extended to some international bodies, for example the International Maritime Organisation. Any enquires about the status of such an organisation or its employees should be referred to the International Organisations Team, Diplomatic92
Guide on Firearms Licensing LawMissions and International Organisations Unit, Protocol Directorate, Foreign and Commonwealth Office.93
Guide on Firearms Licensing LawChapter 12: Good reason to possess a firearm12.1 This chapter:i. sets out the issues that chief officers will wish to consider in assessing “good reason” in individual cases;ii. advises on the more common “good reasons” that the Home Office would consider proper for the possession of particular firearms and ammunition; andiii. sets out the guiding principles governing the definition of a “good reason” to possess a firearm.The guiding principle behind the requirement to have a “good reason” to possess, purchase or acquire firearms or ammunition, is that firearms are dangerous weapons and the state has a duty to protect the public from their misuse. In general, applicants should be able to demonstrate that they ‘use’ their firearm on a regular, legitimate basis for work, sport or leisure (including collections or research).Introduction12.2 Under section 27(1)(b) of the Firearms Act 1968, firearm certificates shall be granted by chief officers of police if they are satisfied that applicants have a “good reason” for having in their possession, or for purchasing or acquiring, the firearm or ammunition in respect of which applications are made and that in all the circumstances the applicants can be permitted to have the firearm or ammunition in their possession without danger to public safety or to the peace. Apart from assessing fitness to possess firearms, “good reason” is one of the most substantial and complex areas of discretion that chief officers may exercise in licensing firearms. It is therefore imperative that any decision to refuse on grounds of “good reason” must be reasonable.12.3 This guidance is not exhaustive. Chief officers will encounter cases not covered here where they may properly judge that “good reason” is proven. Each case must be judged on its own merits, being mindful of the consistent administration of the Acts and the need to provide fair and equitable treatment to all applicants, while maintaining the duty to protect the public from firearm misuse.12.4 Apart from having a “good reason” in principle, an applicant’s reasons for owning firearms should be genuine. Equally, any reason to refuse an application must be clearly justified and explained. Chief officers should exercise caution in dealing with cases where the applicant presents a nominal reason for possessing firearms without supporting evidence. The police will be expected to make reasonable inquiries to verify the applicant’s “good reason” for the possession of firearms. This may include:94
Guide on Firearms Licensing Lawi. a request for written authorities where relevant (and possible).ii. verification of the likelihood of the quarry species being present and, if relevant, causing a level of undesired impact which justifies lethal control.iii. the suitability of land for the firearms and ammunition requested commensurate with the applicant’s experience.iv. their authority to shoot on the land; and,v. in the case of target shooters: verification of club membership and shooting activities.vi. in the case of collectors: activity, including academic research, membership of recognised bodies etc.12.5 An intention to acquire a firearm certificate, with the attendant responsibilities, should generally involve a genuine intent to use the firearms concerned regularly (depending on the type of firearm and the opportunities to use it) or a “good reason” of similar substance. Failure to use a firearm or failure to acquire one by the end of the certificate’s life may be cause for further inquiry as to the applicant’s intentions, (but see paragraph 12.53 and sections on firearms of historical importance, collections and trophies of war).12.6 “Good reason” should be neither confined to need nor equated with desire. Most firearm certificate holders possess firearms for reasons of their profession, sport, collectors or recreation, and may properly wish to exercise discretion as to what types of firearms they choose for these purposes. On the other hand, a simple wish to own a particular sort of firearm is not in itself “good reason” without further supporting evidence of intentions. Chief officers should be mindful of case law (Anderson v Neilans (1940) and Joy v Chief Constable of Dumfries and Galloway (1966)) which suggests that the chief officer should consider the application firstly “from the standpoint of the applicant rather than from that of a possible objector”. “Good reason” will need to be demonstrated for each firearm to be held under section 1 of the 1968 Act.12.7 With the exception of the limits set by the Deer Act (for more information, see Chapter 13) and similar legislation, the suggested calibres for different quarry species are intended as examples of the typical range of calibres used rather than prescriptive limits. In most cases there will be a range of broadly similar commercial calibres suitable for different quarry (see paragraph 12.8 for definition of this term for the purposes of this guidance).Quarry shooting, including shooting pest species (vermin) and other shooting over land12.8 ‘Quarry’ is the general term for live animals (including birds) shot over land. In this context, ‘land’ means an area to be shot over, for example, a woodland, moorland, heath, wetland, foreshore, open water or field. Firearm certificate holders may wish to use firearms to shoot deer, game, pest or other quarry species. Calibres95
Guide on Firearms Licensing Lawauthorised should have sufficient muzzle energy to ensure a clean humane dispatch of the quarry species concerned.12.9 A certificate holder may shoot any quarry that is lawful (where they are authorised to shoot). Whilst guidance is provided, it is the responsibility of the shooter to know what calibre is suitable for which quarry, and when certain quarry or ammunition is lawful (including the need to obtain or rely upon a licence from the relevant licensing authority to permit the shooting of protected species). Once initial “good reason” has been established for the possession of a firearm, there is no requirement for “good reason” to be demonstrated for additional quarry species or amendments providing the firearms are not underpowered for the species (see also paragraph 12.16). A cartridge should be capable of achieving a humane dispatch, and it is the responsibility of the shooter to ensure that any excess energy will be absorbed by the backstop. The “any other lawful quarry” condition (which also applies to protected species that the certificate holder might be licensed to shoot) should be applied. If an applicant is suitable to hold a firearm certificate and is deemed safe to do so, there is no requirement to restrict the quarry they shoot by the use of conditions imposed on the individual’s firearm certificate.A person wishing to shoot over land should nominate in their application a specific area of land over which they intend to or have permission to shoot (this does not restrict their ability to shoot elsewhere where permission is also given), and provide written authority, where appropriate, from the person entitled to grant the shooting rights. The land may then be examined and approved by the police (if it is not already known to be suitable) in order to help to establish that the “good reason” requirement has been fully met, and that the use of firearms and ammunition will not endanger public safety or the peace (section 27(1)(c) of the 1968 Act).12.10 The land need not be owned or rented by the applicant, nor need they have regular or automatic access to it. Farmers and landowners may allow shooters to shoot on their land, for payment or otherwise, on a formal or informal basis. An applicant need not always nominate a piece of land as evidence of “good reason”, but in such cases the applicant may be required, where possible, to provide written evidence, for example from a relevant organisation, a professional pest controller, gamekeeper or of a booking to shoot.12.11 It is accepted that land is not intrinsically “safe” or “unsafe” and that any shooter will have to exercise a strong measure of discretion in deciding whether to shoot in particular circumstances. However, the police will wish to be satisfied as part of “good reason” that the land nominated is not clearly unsuitable for the types of firearms or ammunition to be used. The land inspection is intended only as part of the process of verifying that a “good reason” exists. It should not normally be extended to other areas of land on which the applicant intends to shoot unless there is to be a condition restricting a new shooter to specified land only. An inspection, where it is required, may provide a good opportunity to confirm that the applicant understands the characteristics of the land and the best places to shoot safely on it.12.12 The applicant’s knowledge of safe shooting is also very important and they should therefore, where possible, be present when a land inspection takes place. This will give applicants the opportunity to confirm that they are aware of any potential hazards and know that no shot must ever be fired from a rifle unless there is a safe96
Guide on Firearms Licensing Lawbackstop. Some of the issues that the police will need to consider in relation to all the circumstances of the specific application are:a) Presence of rights of way, public roads and footpaths and their frequency of use;b) Proximity of dwellings;c) Suitable backstops relevant to the firearm to be used (also important with a shot gun when using section 1 ammunition);d) General topography of the land; and,e) Presence of any quarry species on the land (see paragraphs 12.9, 12.14 and 12.15 for guidance).12.13 A person whose certificate is to be conditioned to allow shooting only on land approved by the chief officer of police, should be able to establish whether an area of land has been approved for that type and calibre of firearm by contacting their local police firearms licensing department. It is expected that in only a small number of cases will it be necessary to inspect the land.12.14 When land inspections are required, the knowledge of local shooters, stalkers, gamekeepers etc. may be drawn upon. This is particularly important in cases of doubt. Decisions to refuse approval on public safety grounds should not be based on the assessment of a police employee with little or no experience in such matters and the views of those experienced in the field use of firearms should be sought before final decisions are made. Shooting organisations may also be able to assist with detailed information about the practical applications of rifle/cartridge combinations.12.15 “Good reason” to possess particular firearms will generally be linked to the quarry species found on the land concerned. However, conditions for the possession of such firearms may allow the certificate holder to deal with reasonable eventualities, for example, pest or game species or the humane destruction of injured animals on the estate. The Pests Act 1954 (see relevant section in Chapter 13) can be used to impose a duty with financial penalties on occupiers of land to control rabbits on their land. Under the Animals Act 1971 section 9, a person may, under certain specified circumstances, shoot a dog found worrying sheep, cattle or other livestock. Protection of livestock may constitute the ‘good reason’ for possessing a rifle for some farmers or others involved in animal husbandry (see also Chapter 13). Although not stipulated in law, a shot gun may be used where dogs worrying sheep and other livestock are to be killed. Where the use of a rifle for these purposes is cited as “good reason”, Natural England and DEFRA advise that calibres suitable for small deer would be appropriate.12.16 The table at the end of this chapter provides guidance on whether, for the purposes of establishing “good reason”, a particular calibre is suitable for shooting certain quarry. It should be noted that the list of calibres is not exhaustive but will serve as a useful guide.12.17 ‘Yes’ indicates that the calibre is suitable for the purpose, and pursuit of such quarry would normally be a “good reason” to possess such a rifle. ‘No’ indicates that the calibre and muzzle energy is unsuitable, unlawful or inhumane, and pursuit of such a quarry would not therefore be a “good reason” to possess such a rifle. This, however, should not exclude the use of a larger or more powerful firearm, for which “good reason” has been established, to shoot smaller quarry (see paragraph97
Guide on Firearms Licensing Law12.9). In some cases an applicant will want to possess two similar firearms for the same category of use, for example, where an employer requires the applicant to use a firearm for official purposes but the applicant also wants to hold one for personal use (for example, deerstalking). Chief officers should also note that many animals (including all birds) are protected by law (see Chapter 13). Licensing officers will also wish to have regard to other paragraphs in this chapter which offer more detailed guidance in relation to specific quarry.Shooting Small Quarry Species, including Game and Pest Species (Vermin)12.18 The term “game” covers certain birds and animals that may be shot for food and sport. These include pheasant, partridge, grouse, ptarmigan and ground game (rabbits and hares; in Scotland mountain hare can only be shot under licence for specific purposes granted by NatureScot: Hares and licensing | NatureScot). The term “vermin” is not defined in law, but it may include species that cause damage to crops, game, livestock or property such as fox, rabbit, mink, stoat, weasel, brown rat, and grey squirrel; as well as some birds, such as wood pigeon or carrion crow. All wild birds are protected under the Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981 and the Game Act 1831, and can only be shot under licence unless during an open season prescribed by the Acts. Certain species of wild bird, such as wood pigeon or carrion crow, can only be shot under a relevant General Licence for the purposes of conservation, preventing serious damage or preserving public health and public safety. Authorised users or landowners can also apply for an individual licence to control certain species of wild birds where their circumstances are not covered by the general licences. It is important to note that animals such as badgers, deer and wild boar are not viewed as vermin. Guidance on foxes can be found in paragraphs12.25 and 12.26.12.19 Although not set out in legislation, the rifle cartridges most commonly used to shoot ground game and vermin are .17 rim-fire (HMR & Mach 2) and .22 rim-fire. More powerful centrefire cartridges, such as .17 Remington and .22 Hornet are also suitable for ground game and vermin, and may be considered if the applicant also intends to shoot fox to avoid possession of a further gun. Expanding ammunition may be granted for shooting vermin with a rifle.12.20 Self-loading shot guns (‘semi-automatic’ is defined in section 27 of the Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981 as capable of holding more than two rounds in the magazine and applies only to large magazine shot guns (and .22 rim-fire rifles)) may be used to shoot certain pest species under the terms of a licence from either Natural England, Scottish National Heritage, or the Natural Resource Wales but is applicable to avian species only. Large magazine shot guns may be required to deal with serious pest problems with certain avian species such as wood pigeon or carrion crow.12.21 Under schedule 6 of the Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981, certain species such as wild cats, pine martens, badgers and otters may not be shot with any automatic or semi-automatic firearm, or killed, or taken by other prohibited methods under section 11(2) of the 1981 Act. These species may be problematic under certain circumstances but may only be killed under licence (see also Chapter 13). It is acceptable for self-loading shot guns to be used for mammal pest species including rabbits and squirrels. Once “good reason” is established for avian vermin control,98
Guide on Firearms Licensing Lawshot guns of this kind may be allowed for taking other small vermin (including mammals such as squirrels and rabbits).12.22 ‘Specially dangerous’ air rifles in calibres from .177 to .25 operating at over 12 foot- pounds and therefore subject to certification are often used for vermin control and for the shooting of small game when an applicant wishes to use a firearm less powerful than the .22 rim-fire. The same conditions apply to air rifles as any other rifle authorised for quarry shooting.12.23 Section 4 of the 1997 Act allows the possession, purchasing, acquiring, selling or transferring of shot pistols in calibres .410 and 9mm rim-fire, provided that such a pistol is subject to a condition that it is only for use in connection with the shooting of vermin (see Appendix 3 for the exact wording of the condition which covers these circumstances). This exemption was intended mainly for pest controllers who may need to use a firearm of this kind in farm buildings, farmyards and similar areas where use of a conventional shot gun would be inappropriate, for example, barns, fruit cages or near release pens.12.24 Those involved in shooting vermin will normally be authorised to possess up to 750 rounds. However, larger allocations may be required in some circumstances, perhaps for individuals who are responsible for pest control over large areas of land or where there are serious infestations, for example of rabbits. In such cases, it may be appropriate to authorise the individual to possess up to 1,500 rounds. These amounts are only guides and should not be seen as absolute limits to be applied in all cases. An applicant who is responsible for a lot of pest control may reasonably want two rifles firing the same, or a closely allied cartridge.Chief officers of police will wish to be mindful that quarry species are mobile and applicants may not always be able to predict their presence on land on a consistent basis. Certificate conditions should therefore allow the applicant flexibility in dealing with quarry species, and the ‘any other lawful quarry’ condition may be used.However, where a particular quarry forms the basis of the applicant’s “good reason” its likely presence will need to be confirmed (see paragraph 12.14 and 12.15 for guidance).Fox12.25 Although not set out in legislation, common rifle cartridges considered suitable for the shooting of foxes range from .17 Remington, and .22 Hornet to .22 -250 and .220 Swift, though there is a wide range of suitable similar calibres commercially available. In windy areas, where heavier bullets aid accurate shooting, or if applicants wish to use one rifle for shooting both deer and foxes, they may choose a rifle in 6mm (.243/.244) or 6.5mm (.264) calibre..22 Rim-fires are generally considered as having insufficient muzzle energy to be used against foxes at longer ranges. However, these could be suitable for use at short range by experienced persons, and may be permitted in certain situations such as around farm buildings or paddocks. It is for the operator to ensure that the quarry species are shot at the appropriate range with the appropriate ammunition to achieve a humane dispatch. Combination shot gun/rifles should have the rifled barrel in a similar calibre.99
Guide on Firearms Licensing LawThose involved in shooting foxes will normally be authorised to possess up to 250 rounds, but consideration should be given to each shooter’s individual circumstances, particularly where re-loaders are acquiring missiles. See also paragraph 12.9 on allowing the applicant flexibility to reasonably shoot other species on named land.12.26 It is desirable that new applicants should have some previous experience of the safe use of firearms before using such rifles. Experience is neither cartridge nor ammunition type exclusive. It may include the shooting of any quarry species. The aspect that police are looking to be satisfied about is the competency of the applicant to take a safe shot every time. The shooting of any quarry requires a safe backstop for the shot, and such experience is transferable between all quarry species.Wild/feral animals12.27 Authority may be requested to shoot animals which fall outside the scope of usual types of game or vermin, for example feral goat or wild boar. The type of rifle authorised should be appropriate to the quarry species. It is recommended that a rifle of not less than .270 be used for wild boar. For feral goats, DEFRA advises the use of a minimum calibre of .243 with a bullet weight of 100 grains to be humane. However, individual bullet weights should not be stipulated on certificates.12.28 Hunting potentially dangerous animals, such as wild boar, with larger calibre rifles requires particular skill, and applicants should generally have experience of firearms. Applicants should put forward specific named land and a request or authority from the owner/ occupier to shoot the species concerned.Seals12.29 It is an offence to intentionally or recklessly kill, injure or take a seal. However, there is a general exemption for taking a seal which is disabled for the sole purpose of tending and releasing it when no longer disabled, or killing a seal which was so seriously disabled that there was no reasonable chance of its recovering. On 1 March 2021, Schedule 9 of the Fisheries Act 2020 made amendments to the Conservation of Seals Act 1970, such that individual seals can no longer be controlled under the ‘netsman’s defence’ as this was removed from the legislation. More information on this subject can be found within Chapter 13.Deer12.30 Wildlife management is a devolved activity. The shooting of deer in England and Wales is governed by the Deer Act 1991 (as amended), which requires deer be shot with rifle cartridges of particular muzzle energy and, in Scotland, muzzle velocity and bullet weight (see Chapter 13 for further detail). The Deer Act 1991 requires that “soft nosed or hollow nosed” (expanding) ammunition, or in the case of Scotland ammunition “designed to deform in a predictable manner”, must be used for shooting deer. Deer stalkers will normally be authorised to possess up to 250 rounds of ammunition but account should be taken of individual circumstances,100
Guide on Firearms Licensing Lawfor example where re-loaders are acquiring missiles or where the shooter is a professional deer stalker.12.31 Suitable calibres for shooting deer range from .22 centrefire to .45-70. For shooting Muntjac & Chinese Water Deer in England and Wales, a rifle with a calibre of not less than .220 inches and a muzzle energy of not less than 1,000 foot-pounds using a soft or hollow nosed bullet of not less than 50 grains can be used. For shooting Roe, Fallow, Sika and Red deer, a rifle with a calibre of not less than .240 and a muzzle energy of not less than 1700 foot-pounds can be used. However, for the larger species (Fallow, Sika and Red deer), .270 and larger are generally more suitable. See paragraph 12.34 for information about legislative requirements for the shooting of deer in Scotland.12.32 An applicant who wishes to shoot deer should name land which has the likelihood of the appropriate deer species being present, and an invitation, booking or authority to shoot. This is not necessary where a person already holds a deer legal rifle for an established reason. Many deer stalkers will rely on invitations to shoot on payment rather than be hired or paid to do so and may not be able to shoot regularly or frequently, though others may be permanently employed, for example, Forestry Commission staff. Hunting large animals with powerful rifles requires particular skill, and applicants should generally have some experience of firearms.12.33 The Deer Act 1991 also authorises the use of smooth-bore guns of at least 12 bore loaded with a cartridge purporting to contain AAA shot (shot which is .203 inches (5.16 millimetres) in diameter) or a cartridge containing a non-spherical projectile weighing not less than 22.68 grammes (350 grains) to kill deer on any land if it can be shown that the deer were causing serious damage to crops, vegetables, fruit, growing timber or other property, that such damage was likely to continue and be serious in nature and that action was needed to prevent this. This provision was intended to allow authorised persons (namely, but not restricted to, farmers and crofters) who own a shot gun but not a rifle to deal with marauding deer. Shot guns for use with solid slug should be cylinder bored and fitted with sights, if available. Solid slug is ammunition falling within section1 of the 1968 Act and so a firearm certificate is needed for possession and use. A suitable rifle would be more appropriate for a regular need to control deer.Scotland12.34 The legislative requirements for the shooting of deer in Scotland are based on the performance of the ammunition, not the calibre of the rifle. Ammunition must be “designed to deform in a predictable manner”. Article 3 of the Deer (Firearms etc.) (Scotland) Order 1985 makes different provisions for the shooting of Roe deer in Scotland. A calibre is not stipulated but the bullet weight must be not less than 50 grains, the muzzle velocity not less than 2,450 feet per second and the muzzle energy not less than 1,000 foot-pounds. In practical terms, this means a calibre of.222 or greater, rather than the .240 or greater for shooting Roe deer required in England and Wales. For deer in Scotland other than Roe, bullets of not less than 100 grains, and a muzzle velocity of not less than 2,450 feet per second and a muzzle energy of not less than 1,750 foot-pounds are all required. The 1985 Order also allows the use of a shot gun in certain limited circumstances, but for land management reasons only, and must be of not less than 12 bore gauge. Closed seasons are also different in Scotland (see Chapter 13). Otherwise the general comments on deer stalking above apply.101
Guide on Firearms Licensing LawOverseas use12.35 Individuals going overseas may wish to hunt animals not found in this country and wish to acquire firearms for this purpose. This may include, for example, big game or dangerous game animals such as elephant, Cape buffalo, lion or leopard; or plains game, such as various species of antelope.12.36 Rifles for this purpose may include bolt-action or double-barrelled rifles of various calibres, often very large and of high (4,000-5,000 foot-pounds) muzzle energies. These might include .375 H&H Magnum for plains game, calibres between .375 H&H Magnum and .600 for big game, .300 Winchester or greater for bear, and9.3mm x 74R for boar.12.37 The police will wish to be satisfied that an applicant has genuine intentions to use such rifles abroad, though such visits may be infrequent. Zeroing and practicing with ammunition may be permitted in the UK, providing a suitable range or land is available. Those who home-load their ammunition for such zeroing will also need to test and chronograph it. Some rifles intended for antelope and other plains game may also be suitable for deer, boar or other quarry shooting in this country. Once initial “good reason” has been established for a rifle in shooting “dangerous game”, it may also be considered for shooting the larger deer species and boar in Britain. Where a shooter experiences difficulties in obtaining “dangerous game” cartridges in the country where that game is to be hunted, arrangements can be made for a dealer to export an appropriate quantity which can be collected by the shooter at the point of embarkation. Individuals may be authorised ammunition in line with typical amounts authorised for use in firearms for target and quarry shooting.Humane Killing of Animals12.38 The humane killing of sick, injured or lawfully trapped animals with a firearm is normally confined to those who may deal with such animals on a fairly regular basis. Examples would include veterinary surgeons, RSPCA inspectors, hunt servants, and occupiers of farms and smallholdings. Once such a firearm certificate is granted, the holder is able to use the firearm for the humane killing of any animal should the need arise, subject to any conditions on the certificate. The holder may also use a shot gun when appropriate. Rifles of any centrefire calibre may be suitable for this work. For revolvers and slaughtering instruments under section 3 of the 1997 Act, it is suggested a .32 single (or two) shot revolver is suitable for most circumstances, though larger calibres such as the .38 may be considered if the applicant has to deal regularly with large or dangerous animals (for example, horses, water buffalo, bison, Highland cattle or larger deer species). Police forces should note that self-loading (semi-automatic) handguns should not be authorised for the slaughter or humane destruction of animals, as it is not possible to permanently adapt the capacity of handguns which make use of a removable magazine. Note that section 3 does not refer to the use of any particular cartridge.12.39 Sound moderators for pistols should generally be authorised only for veterinary surgeons working at racecourses. Adapted conventional handguns are not generally considered suitable for humane dispatch. The use of solid slug102
Guide on Firearms Licensing Lawammunition for shot guns should normally be authorised only for staff on wild boar farms or other farming establishments, though veterinary surgeons may also have a need for solid slug to destroy large animals such as bulls. The Humane Slaughter Association (HSA) advises that solid slug for shot guns should only be used from a distance and with a suitable backstop. The HSA also advise that, under such circumstances, a suitably powerful rifle may be more accurate. Comprehensive guidance on the humane killing of animals is available from the HSA.12.40 The humane killing of sick or injured animals is distinct from the slaughter of animals for human consumption. The provision of free firearm certificates applies only to the latter category (see section 32(3) of the 1968 Act).Slaughtering12.41 The slaughter of animals for human consumption will often be carried out using captive-bolt instruments that are not considered “firearms” for legal purposes. However, authorisation to possess and acquire a free-bullet slaughtering instrument may be granted to proprietors of slaughterhouses, knackermen, deer and wild boar farmers, butchers and farmers, smallholders and crofters who need to slaughter their own animals. Expanding ammunition should also be authorised for this purpose.12.42 Under section 10 of the 1968 Act, no certificate is required for a person holding a relevant licence (meaning a person who holds a certificate of competence or licence to kill animals under the Welfare of Animals at the Time of Killing (England) Regulations 2015, a person who holds a certificate of competence or licence to kill animals under the Welfare of Animals at the Time of Killing (Wales) Regulations 2014 or a person who holds a certificate of competence to kill animals under the Welfare of Animals at the Time of Killing (Scotland) Regulations 2012) to possess a slaughtering instrument or ammunition in any slaughterhouse or knacker’s yard where they are employed.12.43 Under section 32(3) of the 1968 Act, no fee is payable for a firearm certificate issued in respect of a slaughtering instrument or ammunition thereof which the applicant requires for the humane slaughter of animals.Tranquillising Animals12.44 Tranquillising equipment such as dart guns and blowpipes are normally considered prohibited weapons that discharge noxious substances under section 5(1)(b) of the 1968 Act. However, under section 8 of the 1997 Act, an authority to possess a firearm is not required for a firearm mentioned in section 5(1)(aba), (b) or (c) of the 1968 Act, which is designed or adapted for tranquillising or otherwise treating an animal, if you have a certificate subject to a condition restricting its use to use in connection with the treatment of animals.Authority to possess such firearms should normally be granted to those who have a professional need for such, for example veterinary surgeons, deer farmers and zoo or safari park staff. Such weapons should be used under the direction (though not necessarily the presence) of a veterinary surgeon due to the use of powerful controlled drugs which are issued under licence from Natural103
Guide on Firearms Licensing LawEngland to permit their use. The Royal College of Veterinary Surgeons (RCVS) and the British Small Animal Veterinary Association (BSAVA) have produced guidance on the use of such equipment.12.45 Tranquillising equipment may also be needed for scientific research on animals. If an application were not in connection with the treatment of animals the Section 8 exemption would not apply.Target shooting12.46 Target shooting includes the use of firearms for sport and recreation. The Department for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport recognises the organisation ‘British Shooting’ which brings together the national Governing Bodies for target shooting. Responsibilities for different types of target shooting are divided as follows:i. National Small Bore Rifle Association (NSRA) – .22RF rifles and pistols, air rifles and air pistols not greater than .22 calibreii. National Rifle Association (NRA) – full-bore rifles, centrefire pistols and muzzle-loading rifle, pistol competitions not covered by the Muzzle Loaders Association of Great Britain (MLAGB), section 1 (FAC) shot guns, .22 rifles (lightweight sporting rifles and mini-rifle), and long barrelled pistols/revolvers;iii. Muzzle Loaders Association of Great Britain (MLAGB) - muzzle-loading rifles and pistols (including muzzle-loading “cap and ball” revolvers); andiv. United Kingdom Practical Shooting Association (UKPSA) – target shooting with section 1 shot guns, full-bore rifles, .22 rifles and long barrelled pistols/revolvers.In Scotland, sportscotland and the Scottish Target Shooting Federation act as umbrella bodies for target shooting.12.47 Additionally, the National Rifle Association, the United Kingdom Practical Shooting Association, National Target Shot gun Association and the British Western Shooting Society govern various types of target shooting involving the use of shot guns, muzzle-loading pistols, long barrelled pistols and rifles.12.48 Small cartridge-firing firearms which come under section 5(1)(aba) of the 1968 Act may only be used under the specific authority of the Secretary of State or the Scottish Ministers, at specified locations. These are distinct from long-barrelled pistols and long-range pistols which are section 1 firearms.12.49 Under section 44 of the 1997 Act, a person whose only reason for possessing a rifle or muzzle-loading pistol is for target shooting must be a member of a target shooting club approved by the Home Office or the Scottish Government Safer Communities Directorate. They are subject to the condition that the rifle or muzzle- loading pistol is only to be used for target shooting. The applicant is not confined to shooting only under the auspices of that club and many applicants will wish to shoot with other clubs. However, membership of a particular club will generally be the core of the applicant’s “good reason” and is likely to be the focus of much of their shooting activity. In some cases however, the “good reason” for certain104
Guide on Firearms Licensing Lawfirearms may be activities in a club other than the one nominated club. Long- barrelled pistols, long-range pistols, shot guns falling within section 1 of the 1968 Act and full bore rifles designed or adapted to fire ammunition capable of discharging projectiles at muzzle energies greater than 10,000 foot-pounds do not fall within the three Home Office categories of approval for target shooting clubs, and therefore they cannot take advantage of the free club certificate issued to Home Office approved clubs. They can, however, be held on an individual’s firearm certificate as long as they have the facilities to use the firearms for target shooting. Long-barrelled revolvers, long-range pistols, shot guns falling within section 1 of the 1968 Act and full bore rifles designed or adapted to fire ammunition capable of discharging projectiles at muzzle energies greater than 10,000 foot-pounds may not be borrowed at a range for use by other club members.12.50 An applicant should have access to appropriate ranges for the types of firearm concerned. The National Small-bore Rifle Association and the National Rifle Association (or similar organisations) will have inspection and approval systems in place for ranges run by their club members. Independent assessments are also viable.12.51 Muzzle-loaders and other users of black powder need to hold an Explosives Certificate, a Recipient Competent Authority issued under the Placing on the Market and Supervision of Transfer of Explosives Regulations in order to possess/transfer black powder, though not for Pyrodex and other smokeless powders (SI 1993/2714). The Recipient Competent Authority is now included on all new explosives certificates.12.52 Target shooting will normally involve shooting disciplines or activities under the general auspices of one of the main national shooting organisations (see paragraph12.46 above and other national organisations such as the Historical Breechloading Smallarms Association and the Vintage Arms Association) but will not necessarily be to their competition rules. It will involve shooting at a target on ranges where the holder has lawful authority to shoot provided that adequate financial arrangements are in place to meet any injury or damage claim, but does not necessarily mean shooting in competitions, formal or otherwise. Local shooting disciplines may be accepted as “good reason” for possessing particular firearms.12.53 Target shooters may be expected to use their firearms fairly regularly, say three or more times a year. The police should consider on renewal whether “good reason” continues in respect of all firearms held for this purpose. However, failure to shoot in a year should be regarded as grounds for further enquiries to be made, rather than the automatic partial revocation of the certificate for lack of “good reason”. For example, there may be personal circumstances such as illness, working away (where this is not to be repeated regularly), or practice for a particular competition that may preclude the use of all the firearms concerned. In some cases, competitions for unusual or older arms may be few each year. Owners, and especially collectors, may also not want to regularly shoot old, historic, and valuable firearms, thus avoiding excessive wear and tear.12.54 Chief officers of police should also consider the “good reason” for possession of ammunition quantities for target shooting. Allocations of 1,000 rounds, to possess, purchase or acquire, are not unreasonable for most regular shooters. A serious target shooter (for example in a county or national squad) may reasonably wish to possess up to 6,000 rounds to ensure consistency in performance between105
Guide on Firearms Licensing Lawbatches. In exceptional circumstances greater amounts may be required. These figures should be used as guides only and should not be interpreted as absolute limits. This is normally applicable to .22RF rather than full-bore target shooting. Economy of purchase (‘bulk buying’) is not considered satisfactory as “good reason”.12.55 Long-range pistols will often use rifle actions and cartridges. An applicant to possess a firearm of this sort may be a member of the International Long-Range Pistol Shooting Association (ILRPSA), or other appropriate shooting organisation which organises and marshals this type of shooting discipline, although this is not a requirement. A suitable range (see paragraph 12.50 above) is required.12.56 Pump-action, self-loading and other types of shot gun may be used for ‘practical’ target shooting disciplines in which the shooter moves to engage a number of different targets. Applicants should normally be a member of a relevant organisation such as the National Rifle Association, the United Kingdom Practical Shooting Association or National Target Shot gun Association, either individually or as a member of an affiliated club. For ‘End of Trail’ shooting, a set of practical disciplines with a ‘Wild West’ theme, the British Western Shooting Society (BWSS) is the relevant organisation. In view of the potential hazards associated with the more extreme forms of practical shooting, the police will wish to consider with particular care applications for firearms for ‘practical’ shooting that falls beyond the examples cited above.Large cartridge firearms12.57 High energy, large cartridge rifles subject to section 1 of the 1968 Act (bolt action or straight pull) e.g. those using the .338 Lapua Magnum and the .50 Browning Machine Gun (BMG) cartridges, may be sought by some applicants for long range target shooting. Applications for such rifles for target shooting should be conducted on the same basis as other rifles.Handguns of Historical ImportanceSee Chapter 9.Collection of firearms12.58 The collecting of firearms by a genuinely interested collector should be accepted as a “good reason” for the grant of a firearm certificate. There should be no blanket policy to prevent the collecting of modern firearms (though collectable firearms will tend to be of the Second World War or earlier eras) nor should arbitrary limits be imposed on the number or type of firearms. However, a single firearm is unlikely to be acceptable unless it forms part of a collection of other exhibits (but see Chapter 9). Modern reproductions of vintage arms may be collected, especially to fill gaps in collections of older firearms. There are no calibre-based limits for collecting, and collections may include field artillery, tanks and other armoured fighting vehicles. Vintage handguns are dealt with in Chapter9. Collections may include firearms disguised as other objects that would otherwise be prohibited under section 5(1A)(a) of the 1968 Act. Ammunition may be collected of itself, including expanding, incendiary or armour-piercing106
Guide on Firearms Licensing Lawammunition or explosives that would otherwise be prohibited under section 5(1A) of the 1968 Act.12.59 Chief officers of police should satisfy themselves that the applicant is a bona fide collector who has a genuine interest, perhaps academic, in the evolution of firearms or in particular types or periods, and that the types of firearm requested fall within this interest. Evidence that a person is a member of a relevant society (for example the Historical Breechloading Smallarms Association or the European Cartridge Research Association) might be taken as an indication that they have a genuine interest in collecting, but this is not a requirement. Firearms capable of being fired may be collected, and a collection may include items other than firearms, for example, uniforms and military equipment. Collections of one or two firearms should not normally be accepted unless they form part of a wider collection of non- firearm related exhibits. “Collection” should not be used as an excuse to retain firearms purely for personal or sentimental reasons. In the case of Hutchison v Chief Constable of Grampian (1977), the Court upheld the decision to refuse to issue a certificate for collection to an applicant who was not considered to be a bona fide collector.An appropriately conditioned firearm certificate that authorises the collection of ammunition does not exempt the holder of that certificate from their duty to comply with legislation controlling the storage of explosives. This is the Explosives Regulations 2014 (SI 2014/1638). Ammunition collectors should be made aware of the potential compliance requirements in respect of other legislation. The Force Explosive Liaison Officer (ELO) should be consulted in respect of such matters.The NPCC (FELWG) has produced an Information and Guidance note dealing with this matter. This note has been circulated to the British Shooting Sports Council and the European Cartridge Research Association who may be consulted for further advice.12.60 Generally, bona fide collectors of firearms are not normally authorised to possess ammunition and are made subject to a condition prohibiting the use of their firearms. This will be an appropriate balance to the possession of a large number of firearms by a private individual. However, there are two instances where ammunition might be authorised. Some collectors may wish to collect ammunition either as a part of a wider collection of firearms or in its own right. There may also be cases where applicants wish to fire their firearms occasionally, for example to test fire them on an appropriate range. In these cases, the allocation of ammunition for each firearm should be small, and the applicant expected to use these rarely. The provisions of regular use as for target shooting set out above should not be applied. A similar principle would apply to antique firearms not held as a curiosity or ornament that are held on certificate for occasional firing. Collections of ammunition may also include exhibits to which section 5 of the 1968 Act applies. This will normally be reflected in conditions.12.61 Collectors of firearms should not generally be registered as dealers in respect of their collections (see Chapter 15). Special arrangements apply to collections of firearms held by museums (see Chapter 16), though in cases where a museum holds only a few firearms (for example, as part of a stately home), the grant of a firearm certificate may be appropriate.12.62 The term “trophy of war” is not defined in legislation but is generally held to refer to firearms either carried on active service or captured from the enemy. The term may107
Guide on Firearms Licensing Lawbe interpreted fairly widely when persons of good repute wish to retain possession of a firearm without the associated ammunition, providing that it is not government property. Weapons issued or captured after the Second World War are government property and their retention is not permitted. This applies to weapons brought back from other conflicts, for example, the Falklands campaign in 1982 and the Gulf War in 1990-91, or more recently Afghanistan or Iraq.All persons retaining trophies of war must hold a certificate. The Firearms (Fees) Regulations 2019 (SI 2019/1169) specify the fee payable to recover the costs of the Home Office and Scottish Government in administering an application for section 5 authority to allow for the initial possession of the prohibited firearm. Section 32(4) of the 1968 Act specifies that a fee is not payable in relation to the firearms certificate that may be subsequently issued by the police. No ammunition should be included on a certificate relating solely to a trophy of war. Handguns may be retained as trophies of war under section 6 of the 1997 Act without obtaining the authority of the Secretary of State or the Scottish Ministers, however, this is provided that the person is authorised to possess it by a firearm certificate, and provided that the trophy of war was acquired before 1st Jan 1946.12.63 Firearms acquired from the original holder and no longer held as family heirlooms should not normally be regarded as “trophies of war” and should be subject to the normal firearm certificate procedure. They may qualify for Section 7.1 or 7.3 status under the 1997 Act. Firearms recovered from wrecked ships and crashed military aircraft cannot be regarded as trophies of war and their retention, unless authorised by the Receiver of Wreck or the Ministry of Defence, cannot be authorised.12.64 The provisions of section 6 of the 1997 Act make no mention of the inheritance of handguns held as trophies of war so these cannot be inherited directly under those provisions. However, the Home Office is prepared, in principle, to grant the Secretary of State’s authority to allow new heirs to inherit such weapons, and they may then be entered on the heir’s certificate as “trophies of war” in the usual way.Signalling apparatus12.65 Signalling apparatus may include flare pistols of up to one-and-a-half inch (37mm) calibre, and pen-type launchers for distress flares, as well as bird scaring apparatus used at airports or for agricultural bird scaring, where use of a conventional shot gun would be inappropriate. Permission to possess such items is normally granted to ships’ masters as part of ships’ equipment, to small boat owners, to harbour or airport employees, farms/ estate managers (bird scaring) or to members of mountain rescue teams. Deerstalkers, wildfowlers or hill walkers who operate in isolated areas may also need to seek authority to carry some form of distress flare.12.66 Flares of a kind that use a male spigot launcher are not subject to controls and are commonly used by mariners, hill walkers and others. Likewise, gas powered ‘guns’ and blank firing guns used by farmers to scare birds from crops are not subject to certification, and controlled firearms are not generally needed for this purpose. However, the ammunition for such bird scaring equipment is usually a single projectile, and is thus subject to certification. Line-throwing rockets (and their launchers/projectors) and similar devices for throwing ropes to ships in distress are not generally considered to be “firearms” for certification purposes.108
Guide on Firearms Licensing LawControlling Races12.67 Section 5 of the 1997 Act states that an authority under section 5 of the 1968 Act is not required to possess a small firearm (handgun) under section 5(1)(aba) of the 1968 Act, at an athletics meeting for the purpose of starting races. The same is true in order to possess, purchase, acquire, sell or transfer a small firearm (handgun) for this specific purpose, provided a certificate is held, subject to the condition that its use must be connected with starting races at athletics meetings. This is intended to allow starters, who may not necessarily be the certificate holder, to use guns that produce a muzzle-flash to start races at which records might be set. In practice, only those starters who have achieved level 3, level 4 or above as part of the UK Athletics (UKA) licencing scheme should be granted a certificate. The UKA licence holder should also have a letter of approval issued by the Technical Committee of UKA and signed by a UKA Executive Officer. Starters of swimming, cycling and other races have no need of working firearms and may use blank-firing pistols which are not subject to certification.12.68 Small cannons of the kind used for starting (or controlling) yacht races may be authorised for members of yacht clubs and similar maritime associations. These should be treated as signalling apparatus for certification purposes and should only be authorised for use with blank ammunition, (see Chapter 6).Historical re-enactment12.69 The use of firearms in historical re-enactment is most commonly associated with the Sealed Knot and other groups who recreate the English Civil War era, such as the English Civil War Society. However, periods covered by re-enactors using firearms extend from the Middle Ages to the Second World War and later. Re- enactors possessing black powder (gunpowder) will also need an Explosives Certificate. Muzzle-loading muskets and small cannon are classed as section 2 shot guns for certification purposes. Re-enactors may also use imitation and deactivated firearms which are not subject to certification, especially for the more modern period. However, re-enactors will often wish to demonstrate the workings of their weapons in detail, and weapons falling within section 1 of the 1968 Act will be appropriate for this purpose.A distinction is made between battle re-enactors and those involved in historical performance where there are characters in a public presentation using some form of a script and rehearsals and firearms and blank ammunition may be needed as props. In the absence of Court rulings, chief officers of police may consider that only the latter qualify for the exemption to hold a certificate under section 12(1) of the 1968 Act (see also Chapter 6).12.70 Firearms commonly used for re-enactment may include rifles (generally bolt-action or single shot), rifled muskets and other muzzle-loading small-arms, muzzle-loading cannon, other artillery, and guns mounted on tanks, ships and other armoured fighting vehicles. Many Lee-Enfield .303 “rifles” and any other rifles of World War One and Two vintage will have been smooth-bored in the past for use as shot guns, albeit now held as weapons falling within section 1 of the 1968 Act with large capacity or detachable magazines. For large guns with a crew, for example, a109
Guide on Firearms Licensing Lawmuzzle-loading cannon over 2 inch bore, only the gun captain need hold a firearm certificate. Live ammunition for target shooting should not generally be authorised for weapons used for re-enactment. Antique weapons fired with blank ammunition (for example Snider-Enfield and Martini Henry rifles used by Victorian re-enactment groups) should be held on certificate. If any weapon is used for more than one purpose – for example, a re-enactor may wish to hold the same weapon formuzzle-loading target shooting – it should be able to be clarified for the chief officer of police to record the case.12.71 Re-enactors will normally be a member of an appropriate society for the historical period concerned and be authorised to possess firearms relating to the period and the role played, though this is not a requirement. Some re-enactors, in particular cavalry soldiers, may be members of several societies and play a range of roles with need for a mixture of historical weapons. Muzzle-loading pistols, including muzzle-loading revolvers used by American Civil War re- enactors and “Western Groups”, will normally be authorised for those playing officers, cavalry soldiers or cowboys. In cases of doubt the chief officer of police may wish to consult with the officers and officials of the relevant re-enactment society concerned.Theatrical use12.72 Section 12 of the 1968 Act permits people taking part in a theatrical performance, rehearsal or the production of a cinematographic film to possess genuine firearms during the performance or rehearsal. Under these circumstances, a firearm certificate may be issued to the theatre manager or film production armourer (for these purposes, ‘film’ may be held to include television). Persons under eighteen do not qualify for this exemption by virtue of sections 27 and 28 of the 1968 Act, as amended by regulation 4(2) and 4(3) respectively of the 1992 Regulations. For authenticity, there may also be occasions where a genuine prohibited firearm may be possessed during the performance or rehearsal.In these circumstances, a section 5 authority will be issued by the Secretary of State, for England and Wales, or Scottish Ministers to the theatre manager or film production armourer. In all circumstances, the firing of live ammunition during performance or rehearsal is not permitted. See also paragraph 12.69 for the distinction between historical performance and battle re-enactment. For more information on the possession and use of prohibited firearms for theatrical and cinematic use see Chapter 3.Component parts12.73 Section 57(1D) of the 1968 Act defines the relevant ‘component parts’ in relation to a lethal barrelled weapon or a prohibited weapon as:(a) a barrel, chamber or cylinder,(b) a frame, body or receiver,(c) a breech block, bolt or other mechanism for containing the pressure of discharge at the rear of a chamber,but only where the item is capable of being used as a part of a lethal barrelled weapon or a prohibited weapon.110
Guide on Firearms Licensing Law12.74 Component parts of firearms are subject to certificate control and may be authorised if a shooter needs replacement or interchangeable parts.12.75 Spare cylinders for muzzle-loading revolvers are not normally authorised except for use in “Bianchi” style competitions under National Rifle Association approved courses of fire. It should be noted, however, that some cased sets, both antique and modern reproductions, will contain a spare cylinder, or cylinders, and these may be properly included on certificate for both possession and use.12.76 Section 3 of the 1968 Act makes it an offence for anyone to sell or transfer an air weapon, including their component parts and accessories (see Home Office circular 031/2007) by way of trade or business unless they are registered with the police as a firearms dealer under section 33 of the 1968 Act.Spare shot gun component parts are not subject to certificate control except for dealers (see Chapter 2). With regard to air weapons the pressure bearing parts are the barrel, cylinder or reservoir and the piston. Buddy bottles used for filling the reservoir of pre-charged pneumatic air weapons are not considered to be components.With modern developments in firearms design many modular systems have come onto the market. A modular rifle can be easily changed to other cartridges by fitting interchangeable barrels and/or bolt components to the action. Each new barrel and/or bolt component will require a variation as they are relevant component parts.Sound Moderators12.77 Sound moderators are subject to certificate control under section 57(1) of the 1968 Act as an accessory “designed or adapted to diminish the noise or flash caused by firing” a firearm. Sound moderators are often used when shooting game, deer, or vermin. In the case of the latter, they might facilitate more effective or less intrusive pest control. They are appropriate for reducing hearing damage to the shooter, or to reduce noise nuisance, for example, for deer control in urban parks, or close to residential properties, to avoid disturbing other sensitive species (especially during the breeding season) or to reduce recoil of the rifle. “Good reason” to possess a rifle for shooting game, vermin or deer should normally imply “good reason” to possess a sound moderator. It should be noted that sound moderators on air weapons or section 2 shot guns are not considered to be component parts. Chief officers of police should also be aware of the case of Broome v Walter (1989) where it was found that an integral sound moderator, that is one that is part of the firearm, does not require separate authorisation. Whilst sound moderators for air weapons are not subject to certificate control they will need to be accounted for in dealers registers when they are in the dealers stock.12.78 Some target shooting events where fire and movement is conducted on field firing ranges may require the use of sound moderators, for example, where hearing protection may impede the shooter and where voice commands need to be heard or given by the shooter for safety and continuity.12.79 Sound moderators should be assigned a calibre, but it is good practice to permit them to be used with more than one calibre of firearm. It is a matter for the individual shooter, subject to the “good reason” test, to decide whether to use a111
Guide on Firearms Licensing Lawmoderator on more than one suitable firearm or to have individual moderators for each firearm.12.80 Section 11A of the 1968 Act sets out circumstances in which a rifle or shot gun may be borrowed. It should be accepted that where the lender’s certificate authorises the possession of a sound moderator, the act of lending the rifle to another person (the borrower) includes the lending of the sound moderator that may be fitted to it.Firearms for personal protection12.81 Applications for the grant of a firearm certificate for the applicant’s, or another’s, protection, or that of premises, should be refused on the grounds that firearms are not an acceptable means of protection in Great Britain. It has been the view of successive Governments for many years that the private possession and carriage of firearms for personal protection is likely to lead to an increase in levels of violence. This principle should be maintained in the case of applications from representatives of banks and firms protecting valuables or large quantities of money, or from private security guards and bodyguards. The exception to this would be armed guards on UK flagged ships, the justification being the unique threat posed by piracy to cargo and passenger ships in specific high risk geographical areas.Members of the Armed Forces and Police Authorised Firearms Officers12.82 A person in the Armed Forces who wishes to purchase, acquire or have in their possession any firearm for their own private use (that is, as a private citizen rather than in the course of their military duties) must apply to the local chief officer of police for a certificate, and have their application considered in the normal way (including payment of the appropriate fee). “Military training”, “TA training” and “membership of the Army Rifle Association” are not considered to meet the “good reason” requirement.Possible reasons for the grant of a certificate include: membership of a recognised civilian or military target shooting club, sporting purposes, or shooting vermin.Similar provisions apply to applications from police Authorised Firearms Officers who wish to shoot in a private capacity.12.83 The Ministry of Defence would appreciate a report being sent to the Commanding Officer of any member of the armed forces who requests a Firearm Certificate quoting “Military Training” or “TA Training” as “good reason” to possess a privately owned firearm.Reloading ammunition (home loading)12.84 Certificate holders often load their ammunition in order to improve the accuracy of their firearms. There are too many technical factors to cover within this guidance, and advice should be sought from shooting associations or competent reloaders if the need arises.112
Guide on Firearms Licensing Law12.85 For quarry shooting some bullet designs (soft nose, hollow nose, ballistic tip, thin or thick jacketed or core bonded) may be preferred over another with regard to their behaviour when they strike the quarry or pest species. Certificate holders often develop their preferences based on their own research and development through home loading.12.86 Whilst there may be some small cost benefit, more often the reasons for home loading are the pursuit of accuracy, safety and performance. Where performance is involved; different quarry types and their physical makeup, the different ranges in which they are to be engaged (e.g. lighter or smaller flatter trajectory bullets for foxes and heavier bullets for deer) all vary, and home loaders may wish to experiment to ascertain the best combinations. It is not unusual for home loaders to manufacture two or three specific rounds in the same calibre for different species e.g. fox, small deer and large deer; this is to achieve a clean kill of more than one species without having to change firearms.12.87 Home loaders will usually manufacture various batches for testing using a chronograph to measure velocity and thus ascertain the best combinations. Whilst a chronograph is important to home loaders; it is of utmost importance for ammunition intended for use on animals due to legislative requirements such as in the Deer Acts (see Chapter 13 for more information).12.88 Whilst there are no limits imposed on the number of solid projectiles that a certificate holder may purchase for manufacturing ammunition, a home loader must not manufacture more than the maximum quantity of ammunition authorised by their firearm certificate.12.89 Some reloaders may test ammunition by firing groups of 3 to 5 rounds, and repeat the group several times to measure consistency. As bullet designs, cases, primers and propellants are so varied, it is not unusual for home loaders to require larger amounts of missiles (bullets) for their research, and possess them in addition to any factory or other home loaded ammunition already held. Load development can be a long process, especially with unusual cartridges; particularly as new products become available.12.90 Details of relevant explosives legislation governing the manufacture and storage of ammunition and shooters powders can be obtained in the first instance from the local force Explosive Liaison Officer (ELO) or from the Explosives Policy Team, Health & Safety Executive, 5S.G Redgrave Court, Merton Road, Bootle, Merseyside, L20 7HS.Quarry ShootingNote that the absence of a calibre in the table below should not preclude it being considered by the Police. The purpose of this table is as a guide to establish initial “good reason”.Paragraphs 12.9 and 12.15 to 12.17 should be read in conjunction with this table.113
Guide on Firearms Licensing LawCartridgesMuzzle energy(ft lb)Vermin & ground game and other small quarry3Fox and other medium quarry4Deer and otherlarge quarry5Dangerous Game6.177-.25 AirRifles (FAC)1.22 RF.17 Mach 2.17 HMR.22 WMR.17 Remington2.22 Hornet2.204>12 ft lb100-200650-700800-900YesNo(Yes for .17 Remington & HMR, .22Hornet and WMR – also .22 RF in certain circumstances (see paragraph 12.25))NoNo.17 Remington2.218 Bee.22 Hornet2.22-.250.220 Swift.222 Remington5.56mm/.223.2436mm PPC 6mm/.244800-900600-800650-7001,350-1,5001,300-1,900900-1,0001,000-1,4001,600-2,0001,300-1,8001,800-2,100No(Yes for .17 Remington & HMR, .22Hornet and WMR)YesNo7(Yes for Muntjac and Chinese water deer in England and Wales – see paragraph 12.31)Yes in Scotland for Roe Deer with .222 and greater.)No.2436mm/.244.25-066.5mm x 55/.256.257 Weatherby.264.2707mm/.275.284.30-06.3037.62mm x 51/.308.444 Marlin.45-701,600-2,0001,800-2,1002,000-2,4001,800-2,4002,400-2,9001,600-2,9002,450-2,7002,200-2,4002,250-2,8002,600-3,0001,900-2,4002,400-2,6002,500-3,0001,600-2,400NoNo(Yes for .243 & 6mm/.244)(see also paragraph 12.25)Yes(but see paragraph 12.30-12.34)No.338.3759.3mm Mauser.416.458 Win Mag3,800-4,0004,500-5,0003,500-3,9005,800-6,0002,900-4,900NoNoNoYes114
Guide on Firearms Licensing Law1 FAC air rifles are not suitable for animals larger than vermin or ground game.2 .17 Remington and .22 Hornet would be suitable for use against vermin in specific circumstances (also see paragraph 12.19). Foxes may be shot using .22RF but only at short rage,3 Vermin & Ground Game and other Small Quarry – rat, hare, rabbit, grey squirrel and other similar sized quarry.4 Medium Quarry – fox, feral cat and other similar sized quarry.5 Larger Quarry – feral goat, deer, boar, and other similar sized quarry.6 Dangerous Game – lion, elephant, buffalo, bear etc.7 But note legal requirements for shooting Roe Deer in Scotland set out in paragraph 12.34 and for shooting Muntjac and Chinese Water Deer in England and Wales set out in paragraph 12.31.115
Guide on Firearms Licensing LawChapter 13: Law on Shooting Birds and Animals13.1 This chapter outlines the main legal provisions, outside the Firearms Acts, which relate to the shooting of birds and animals. Chief officers of police will wish to be aware of these in drafting conditions (see Appendix 3) and otherwise authorising shooting which may conflict with these provisions. The laws are varied and complex and chief officers may wish to consult relevant contacts about specific legislation.DeerEngland and Wales13.2 The Deer Act 1991 (as amended) prohibits the use of certain types of firearm or ammunition for the purpose of taking, killing or injuring deer. These are set out in Schedule 2 of the Act:Firearms: any smooth-bore gun; any rifle having a calibre of less than .240 inches or a muzzle energy of less than 2,305 joules (1,700 foot-pounds); any air gun, air rifle or air pistol (see also paragraph 13.6).Ammunition: any cartridge for use in a smooth-bore gun; any bullet for use in a rifle other than a soft-nosed or hollow-nosed bullet.13.3 Exceptions to section 4(2) of the 1991 Act (firearms and ammunition) are set out in section 6(5) and 6(6). Exceptions to section 4(2) and section 2 (taking or killing deer during close season) are set out in section 7 of the Act.13.4 Under section 6(2) of the 1991 Act a person shall not be guilty of an offence under section 2 or section 3 by reason of any act done for the purpose of preventing the suffering of an injured or diseased deer.13.5 Section 6(5) of the 1991 Act provides that a person is not guilty of an offence under section 4(2)(a) by reason of the use as a slaughtering instrument if they use for the purpose of killing any deer a smooth-bore gun which:a) is of not less gauge than 12 bore;b) has a barrel less than 24 inches (609.6 millimetres) in length; andc) is loaded with a cartridge purporting to contain shot none of which is less than.203 inches (5.16 millimetres) in diameter (size AAA or any larger size).13.6 Section 6(6) of the 1991 Act provides that a person is not guilty of an offence under section 4(2)(a) if they use for the purpose of taking or killing or injuring any Chinese water deer or muntjac deer –116
Guide on Firearms Licensing Lawa) a rifle having a calibre of not less than .220 inches and a muzzle energy of not less than 1,356 joules (1000 foot-pounds), andb) a soft-nosed or hollow-nosed bullet weighing not less than 3.24grammes (50 grains).13.7 Section 7 refers to exceptions for the occupier of land where deer are, or someone having rights to kill deer on that land (or a person with the written authority of either type of person), and provides that a person is not guilty of an offence under section 2 (taking, injuring or intentionally killing a deer during the close season) if:a) it has taken place on any cultivated land, pasture or enclosed woodland; andb) if they had reasonable grounds for believing that deer of the same species were causing, or had caused, damage to crops, vegetables, fruit, growing timber or any other form of property on the land; andc) that further serious damage was likely to be caused, and his action was necessary to prevent any such damage.13.8 In this instance a person would not be guilty of an offence under section 4(2)(a) by reason of the use, for the purposes of taking or killing any deer on any land, of any smooth-bore gun of not less gauge than 12 bore which is loaded with either:i) a cartridge containing a single non-spherical projectile weighing not less than22.68 grammes (350 grains); orii) a cartridge purporting to contain shot each of which is .203 inches (5.16 millimetres) in diameter (size AAA).13.9 It should also be noted that the deer must be shot on the land where the damage is being caused, and not elsewhere (such as neighbouring land).13.10 Section 8 of the 1991 Act makes provision for licences to be issued by Natural England, in relation to any land in England, or the Natural Resources Body for Wales, to take deer alive for scientific or educational purposes, or for the purpose of removing deer from one area to another, or to shoot deer during the close season or at night for the purpose of preserving public health or public safety, for conserving the natural heritage, or, in the case of shooting at night, for preventing serious damage to property.13.11 The Deer Initiative publishes Best Practice guidance on Close Season Shooting and on Night Shooting, which anyone issued with such a licence would be expected to follow. Similarly within Scotland, NatureScot publish Best Practice guidance on the management of wild deer in Scotland.13.12 Schedule 1 of the 1991 Act (as amended) sets out the close seasons for deer:Red DeerStags	1 May to 31 July inclusive. Hinds	 1 April to 31 October inclusive.117
Guide on Firearms Licensing LawFallow DeerBuck1 May to 31 July inclusive.DoeRoe Deer1 April to 31 October inclusive.Buck1 November to 31 March inclusive.DoeSika Deer1 April to 31 October inclusive.Stags1 May to 31 July inclusive.Hinds1 April to 31 October inclusive.Red/Sika HybridsStags	1 May to 31 July inclusive. Hinds	 1 April to 31 October inclusive.Chinese Water DeerBuck	1 April to 31 October inclusive. Doe	1 April to 31 October inclusive.Muntjac DeerNo statutory close season (this species breeds all year round).Mercy Killing13.13 Section 6(4) of the 1991 Act, as amended by the Regulatory Reform (Deer) (England and Wales) Order 2007 (“the 2007 Order”), enables a person to use “any reasonable means” to kill any deer if he reasonably believes that the deer has been so seriously injured (otherwise than by his unlawful act), or in such a condition that he reasonably believes killing it to be an act of mercy. ‘Any reasonable means’ is defined in s6 (4A) as, “any method of killing a deer that can reasonably be expected to result in rapid loss of consciousness and death and which is appropriate in all the circumstances (including in particular what the deer is doing, its size, its distance from the closest position safely attainable by the person attempting to kill the deer and its position in relation to vegetative cover). Note that where this defence applies, a person will not be guilty of an offence under section 4(1) or 4(2).Culling of Dependent Young13.14 Section 6(2A) of the 1991 Act, as inserted by the 2007 Order, provides that it is not an offence for a person to take or kill a deer during the close season or at night where he reasonably believes the deer has been deprived of a female deer on which it was dependent or is about to be deprived as a result of disease or lawful taking or killing of a female deer on which it is dependent. Where section 6(2A) defence applies, a person is not guilty of an offence under section 2 or 3. Section 2 refers to the taking or killing of deer in close season, not outside of it.118
Scotland
Guide on Firearms Licensing Law
13.15 Under section 21 of the Deer (Scotland) Act 1996, the Secretary of State for Scotland may make an order regarding the classes of firearms, ammunition, sights and other equipment that may lawfully be used to kill or take deer. The current order on this point is the earlier Deer (Firearms etc) (Scotland) Order 1985 and the main provisions are as follows:a) For the shooting of deer of any species, a bullet of an expanding type designed to deform in a predictable manner of not less than 100 grains (6.48 grams) with a muzzle velocity of not less than 2,450 feet per second (746.76 metres per second) and a muzzle energy of not less than 1,750 foot-pounds (2,373 joules) may be used.For the shooting of roe deer only, a bullet of an expanding type designed to deform in a predictable manner of not less than 50 grains (3.24 grams) with a muzzle velocity of not less than 2,450 feet per second (746.76 metres per second) and a muzzle energy of not less than 1,000 foot-pounds (1,356 joules) may be used.b) Where an occupier of agricultural land or of enclosed woodland has reasonable grounds for believing that serious damage will be caused to crops, pasture, trees or human or animal foodstuffs on that land if deer are not killed, a shot gun may be used.c) Any shot gun used must be of a gauge not less than 12 bore and be loaded with the following ammunition (as specified in the Deer (Firearms etc) (Scotland) Order 1985):i. For shooting deer of any species, a single non-spherical projectile weighing not less than 380 grains (24.62 grams); orii. For shooting deer of any species, a cartridge purporting to contain not less than 550 grains (35.64 grams) of shot, none of which is less than0.268 inches (6.81 millimetres) in diameter, that is to say size SSG or larger; oriii. For shooting roe deer, a cartridge purporting to contain not less than 450 grains (29.16 grams) of shot, none of which is less than 0.203 inches (6.81 millimetres) in diameter, that is to say size AAA or larger.and used for the purpose of taking or killing any deer found on any arable land, garden grounds or land laid down in permanent grass (other than moorland and unenclosed land) and forming part of that land or on enclosed woodland, as the case may be.Section 26(2) of the 1996 Act makes provision as to who may use a shot gun to kill deer. This is the occupier suffering damage to those interests outlined above and, if duly authorised in writing by the occupier suffering damage for the purpose, any or all of:i. the owner in person.ii. the owner’s employees.119
Guide on Firearms Licensing Lawiii. the occupier’s employees, or any other person normally resident, on the land.iv. any other person approved in writing by Scottish Natural Heritage as a fit and competent person for the purpose.13.16 Occupiers may control deer over agricultural land or enclosed woodland in season under section 26(1) of the Deer (Scotland) Act 1996 (as amended). Out of season control may be carried out under general or specific authorisation obtained from NatureScot.13.17 All control of deer out of season must be authorised by NatureScot. Authorisations granted may be general or specific in nature.13.18 A general authorisation allows for owners and occupiers suffering damage to improved agricultural land or enclosed woodland to cull deer for the purpose of preventing damage. General authorisation does not allow the culling of female deer over one year old of any species between the period of the 1 April and the 31 August. The owner, owner’s employees, the occupier’s employees or any other person normally resident on the land can carry out control under any general authorisation on enclosed woodland and improved agricultural land without the need to be on the NatureScot fit and competent register.13.19 Those operating under a general authorisation must have read and understood the general authorisation and carry out any control in accordance with the conditions listed on the authorisation. This general authorisation and its conditions are subject to yearly review and a current copy may be found at NatureScot's website.13.20 Specific authorisations may be sought for the control of deer to prevent damage to unenclosed woodland or natural heritage, to protect public safety, or for scientific purposes. In addition, specific authorisation must be sought for the control of female deer of any species between 1 April and 31 August.13.21 Specific authorisations are generally granted only to owners or occupiers of ground or persons nominated by them in writing and who are registered NatureScot as fit and competent. Exemptions may apply for those controlling female deer in enclosed woodland or on agricultural ground between 1 April and 31 August.13.22 In Scotland, using a vehicle to drive deer with the intention of taking or killing is an offence under section 19 of the 1996 Act. However, NatureScot may authorise owners of land which deer are on, or any person nominated in writing by them, to use any vehicle to drive deer in order to take or kill them for the purposes of deer management.13.23 Close seasons in Scotland are provided in the Deer (Close Seasons) (Scotland) Order 2011 (SI 2011/417), and are as follows:Red DeerStag	 21October to 30 June inclusive. Hinds	16 February to 20 October inclusive.Fallow DeerBuck1 May to 31 July inclusive.120
Guide on Firearms Licensing LawDoeRoe Deer16 February to 20 October.Buck21 October to 31 March inclusive.Doe1 April to 20 October inclusive.Sika DeerStag	 21October to 30 June inclusive. Hinds	16 February to 20 October inclusive.Red/Sika HybridsStags	21 October to 30 June.Hinds	16 February to 20 October.Muntjac and Chinese Water DeerNo statutory close season.13.24 Note: The functions of the Deer Commission were transferred to NatureScot (formerly known as Scottish Natural Heritage) in 2010, and the commission was dissolved. The Public Services Reform (Scotland) Act 2010 achieved this transfer of functions. Schedule 1 of this act contains the amendments that were made to the Deer Scotland Act 1996 to achieve this.Night Shooting of DeerEngland and Wales13.25 Section 3 of the 1991 Act makes it an offence to take or intentionally kill a deer at night. ‘Night’ is defined as being the period between the expiry of the first hour after sunset and the beginning of the last hour before sunrise.13.26 A person may shoot deer at night under the provisions of a licence issued by Natural England or Natural Resources Wales under section 8 of the 1991 Act for the purpose of preserving public health or public safety, for conserving the natural heritage, or for preventing serious damage to property.13.27 A person shall not be guilty of an offence if the shooting of deer at night is conducted in pursuance of a Notice issued by DEFRA under section 98 of the Agriculture Act 1947. No person shall also be guilty of an offence if deer are killed at night if such a killing is to prevent the suffering of an injured or diseased deer under section 6(2) of the 1991 Act.Scotland13.28 Section 18 of the Deer (Scotland) Act 1996 (as amended by section 26(5) of the 2011 Act) makes it an offence to take or wilfully kill or injure deer at night. ‘Night’ is again defined as being the period between the expiry of one hour after sunset and the beginning of the last hour before sunrise. An occupier or person nominated by the occupier must satisfy NatureScot that they are fit and competent to receive authorisation (see section 37(1)), they may then be granted authorisation from NatureScot to shoot deer at night if:121
Guide on Firearms Licensing Lawi. either the taking or killing is necessary to prevent damage to crops, pasture, human or animal foodstuffs, or to woodland; orii. the taking or killing is in the interests of public safety, andiii. no other means of control which might be reasonably adopted in the circumstances would be adequate.13.29 NatureScot publishes a code of practice for night shooting (see section 37(5) of the Deer (Scotland) Act 1996), which sets out the conditions which a certificate holder is obliged to follow. These are:i. The authorisation document must be completed and returned to NatureScot not later than seven days after the date of expiry with details of any deer killed under authorisation.ii. NatureScot reserves the right to accompany controllers at any time to determine that the terms and conditions of the authorisation are being applied.iii. NatureScot may withdraw the authorisation at any time.iv. That the person authorised will comply with the Code of practice for Shooting Deer at Night (updated 4 July 2003).v. That the person authorised will inform the local police and neighbours of the times night shooting will take place.vi. That prior to commencement of shooting, the person authorised will warn any person, who to that person’s knowledge, is likely to be on the land at the above mentioned location of the issue of this authorisation and the intention to take or kill deer.vii. The authorised person must comply with The Deer (Firearms etc.) (Scotland) Order 1985 and appropriate sections of the Deer (Scotland) Act 1996 (as amended).viii. A minimum of two persons are required to operate under this authorisation.ix. In woodland, a suitable dog must be present to track wounded deer and prevent unnecessary suffering.13.30 There is no longer a requirement to use larger calibre rifles for night shooting; controllers must ensure firearms meet minimum requirements as set out in paragraph 13.15.13.31 Use of head and neck shots are not recommended for night shooting. As with all other authorisations, minimising the risk to public safety and protecting animal welfare are the controller’s responsibility.13.32 For Scotland, further advice on the 1996 Act and its revisions can be obtained from NatureScot.122
Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981
Guide on Firearms Licensing Law
13.33 The Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981 (“the 1981 Act”) makes it a criminal offence to intentionally kill, injure or take any wild bird (in England and Wales, game birds are similarly protected by the Game Act 1831). However, quarry species (listed in Schedule 2, Part I) and game bird species (listed in section 2 of the Game Act) may be killed during prescribed open seasons. In certain circumstances an ‘authorised person’ is also permitted to kill or take certain species during the closed season covered by General or Individual Licences.13.34 Copies of General Licences are available online at the following links:England - Natural EnglandWales - Welsh GovernmentScotland - NatureScot13.35 Individual Licences may be issued by wildlife licensing authorities to individuals or groups of people. Section 27 of the 1981 Act does not define game birds separately from wild birds; game birds such as common pheasant and red grouse are captured by the definition of ‘wild birds’. It is possible to shoot them in the open season without a licence, and they are listed in Schedule 2, Part I as per other quarry species, but a licence is required to shoot them in close season (see paragraphs 13.47 and 13.48 below). The definition of a game bird in section 27 of the 1981 Act was repealed in Scotland (see section 2 of the Wildlife and Natural Environment (Scotland) Act 2011), with the result that game birds are not defined separately from wild birds in Scotland13.36 A number of animals are protected under Section 9 of the Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981 (as amended) via their inclusion in Schedule 5 of the Act. These species include:i. red squirrels,ii. dormouse,iii. water voles andiv. adders.13.37 In England and Wales, those animals that are known as European Protected Species (including all bats, otters and whales) are included in Schedule 5 for certain offences, but receive protection mainly from the Conservation of Habitats and Species Regulations 2017 (SI 2017/1012) in England and Wales. In Scotland, European protected species receive protection through the 2010 Regulations (SI 2010/490) for reserved matters and through the Conservation (Natural Habitats) Regulations 1994 (SI 1994/2716) (as amended in Scotland).13.38 It is an offence under section 9(1) of the 1981 Act to intentionally kill, injure or take any species listed in Schedule 5. Section 9(4) states that the intentional or reckless damage, destruction or obstruction of any structure the animal uses for shelter or protection, or disturbing the animal while it is occupying such a structure, is also an offence.123
Guide on Firearms Licensing Law13.39 In brief, the exceptions to the offences in relation to birds and animals include:i. humane destruction of sick or injured birds or animals where there is no reasonable chance of recovery and, in England and Wales, where there is no satisfactory alternative. Further guidance on this exception can be sought from DEFRA;ii. taking injured birds or animals for the purpose of rehabilitationiii. where the act was the incidental result of a lawful operation and could not reasonably have been avoided, in circumstances where the person concerned could not reasonably have foreseen that the unlawful act would be an incidental result of carrying out the lawful operation:iv. if it can be shown that action was necessary for the purpose of preventing serious damage to livestock, foodstuffs for livestock, crops, vegetables, fruit, growing timber or any other form of property or to fisheries under the ‘farmer’s defence’; orv. under a licence issued by the relevant licensing authority.Taking and killing under the Wildlife and Countryside Act 198113.40 Species listed in Schedule 2, Part I of the 1981 Act may be killed or taken outside the close season.13.41 Species include:ï Canada Gooseï Cootï Common Snipeï Gadwallï Goldeneyeï Golden ploverï Greylag Gooseï Mallardï Moorhenï Pink-footed Gooseï Pintailï Pochardï Shovelerï Tealï Tufted Duckï White-fronted Goose (England and Wales only, except (in England) Greenland White-fronted Goose)ï Wigeonï WoodcockWild ducks and wild geese (inland) may be taken or killed from 1 September to 31 January; and those in or over any area below the high-water mark of ordinary124
Guide on Firearms Licensing Lawspring tides may be taken or killed from 1 September to 20 February. See sections 2(4)(c) and (d) of the 1981 Act.Note: In England and Wales the high-water mark is “the area of sea shore which is more often than not covered by the flux and reflux of the four ordinary tides occurring midway between springs and neaps”. For Scotland it is “the area between high and low water marks of ordinary spring tides”.Prohibited use of lead shot13.42 You must not use lead shot to shoot:ï on or over any area below the high-water markï within sites of special scientific interest designated for their important wetlands – (see Schedule 1 of the 1999 Regulations)ï all species of ducks, geese and swansï cootï moorhenï golden ploverï common snipeShooting restrictions during severe winter weather13.43 Between 7 November and 20 February, if freezing weather lasts for seven consecutive days or more, you should only carry out shooting or scaring activities if it is essential. This is to reduce stress on birds, especially wildfowl, such as ducks, geese, rails and waders that are trying to conserve energy when feeding is difficult in frozen conditions. For freezing periods of 14 consecutive days or more, you must check if there is a statutory suspension on killing or taking any bird listed in Schedule 2 Part 1 of the 1981 Act. Read more about the severe weather scheme and when voluntary or statutory suspension applies on the Joint Nature Conservation Committee website. The British Association for Shooting and Conservation will also advertise periods of suspension. During periods of statutory suspension, you can kill or take Canada geese if it is essential. You must try to avoid disturbing any other wildfowl.Dates when other birds may be taken or killed (all dates are inclusive)Coot, Moorhen, and Golden Plover may be taken or killed outside the close season from 1 September to 31 January in England, Wales and Scotland.Common Snipe	12 August – 31 January (England & Wales)12 August – 31 January (Scotland)Woodcock	1 October – 31 January (England & Wales)1 September – 31 January (Scotland)Under Section 2(3) the shooting of waterfowl and waders listed in Part I and also in Part IA of Schedule 2 on Sundays and Christmas Day is not permitted in Scotland125
Guide on Firearms Licensing Lawor in the following English and Welsh counties and boroughs (or the areas they once covered):ï Angleseyï Brecknockï Caernarvonï Carmarthenï Cardiganï Cornwallï Denbighï Devonï Doncasterï Glamorganï Great Yarmouth County Boroughï Isle of Elyï Leeds County Boroughï Merionethï Norfolkï Pembrokeï Somersetï North and West Ridings of Yorkshire.13.44 Section 5(1)(c) of the 1981 Act prohibits the use of certain methods, including automatic and semi-automatic weapons (automatic weapon and semi-automatic weapon as defined in Section 27 do not include any weapon where the magazine is incapable of holding more than two rounds) for killing or taking any wild bird, except under a licence issued by the relevant wildlife licensing authority for each UK country.13.45 Section 11(2) prohibits the use of certain methods, including automatic and semi- automatic weapons, for the killing or taking of any animal in Schedule 6, except under a licence issued by the relevant wildlife licensing authority for each UK country.Conservation of Habitats and Species Regulations 201713.46 These regulations (also known as the ‘Habitats Regulations’) give protection to certain animal species which are known as European protected species, including all bats, otters, dormice, wild cats, dolphins, porpoises and whales. Regulation 39 of the Conservation (Natural Habitats etc) Regulation 1994 (SI 1994/2716) makes equivalent provision for Scotland.It is an offence to deliberately (or recklessly in Scotland) capture, injure or kill any wild animal of a European protected species. It is also an offence to deliberately (or recklessly in Scotland) disturb, to deliberately (or recklessly in Scotland) take or destroy eggs, or to damage or destroy a breeding site or resting place of such an animal (note: there is no requirement for the final offence to be deliberate or reckless).The exceptions to the offences are:126
Guide on Firearms Licensing Lawi. capture, possess, control or transport a disabled animal for the purpose of rehabilitation (the defence can only be used provided that there is no satisfactory alternative course of action and the intended action would not be detrimental to maintaining the favourable conservation status of the species);ii. the humane destruction of sick or injured animals where there is no reasonable chance of the animal’s recovery (the defence can only be used provided that there is no satisfactory alternative course of action and the intended action would not be detrimental to maintaining the favourable conservation status of the species), or;iii. if the animal was lawfully held in captivity.Game13.47 Dates when Game birds may be shot (taken/killed) without the need for a licence are as follows from section 3 of the Game Act 1831 (all dates inclusive):England and Wales13.48 ?Partridge	1 September – 1 FebruaryPheasant	 1 October – 1 February Black Game (heathfowl)	20 August – 10 December* Grouse	 12 August – 10 DecemberCapercaillie	1 October – 10 December†*except in Devon, Somerset and in the New Forest in Hampshire when the open season is between 1 September and 10 December.† While Capercaillie are not currently found in England and Wales as of 2021, they can legally be shot between these dates.13.49 Note: There are no defences for the killing of the above species of game birds in the close season. Licences cannot be issued under either the Game Acts or the Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981 (as amended) to kill or take game birds during the close season. However, in exceptional circumstances, where the birds are causing serious crop damage, a Notice may be served under section 98 of the Agriculture Act 1947.13.50 In England and Wales it is also an offence to kill or take game on a Sunday or Christmas Day during the open season.Scotland13.51 Dates when game birds may be shot, taken or killed are as follows, taken from section 2(4) of the Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981, as amended by the Wildlife and Natural Environment (Scotland) Act 2011. Note that section 2 of the1981 Act applies, as per section 74, and that all dates are inclusive:Pheasant1 October – 1 FebruaryPartridge1 September – 1 February127
Guide on Firearms Licensing LawBlack grouse (heathfowl)20th August to 10th DecemberRed grouse (muirfowl)12th August to 10th DecemberPtarmigan12th August to 10th December13.52 Note: Section 2(1) of the 1981 Act states that a person will not be guilty of an offence of killing, taking, or injuring a bird outside of close season if the person who kills, injures or takes the bird has a legal right or permission to do so. However section 2(3) states that on Sundays and Christmas day section 2(1) shall not apply in Scotland or in any area of England and Wales which the Secretary of State may by order prescribe (see paragraph 13.43 above). Therefore, in the open season it is an offence to kill, take or injure a bird on a Sunday or on Christmas day in one of those areas, regardless of whether the individual would otherwise have a legal right or permission to do so.13.53 Capercaillie are now a protected species in Scotland due to the Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981 (Amendment) (Scotland) Regulations 2001.Ground GameEngland and Wales13.54 In England and Wales ground game (hares and rabbits) have no close seasons, therefore people with shooting rights can shoot ground game all year. In addition, the Ground Game Act 1880 gives an occupier, or one other person authorised in writing by them, a concurrent right to shoot ground game on the land they occupy regardless of whether they hold the shooting rights on that land or not. However, on moorland and unenclosed land the right given to occupiers to shoot ground game is restricted to the period running from 11 December to 31 March inclusive.An occupier can only authorise persons who are:i. members of their household, resident on the land in his occupationii. persons in their ordinary service (i.e. an employee) on such land, and;iii. any other person employed by them for reward in the destruction of ground game.13.55 Under the Conservation of Habitats and Species Regulations 2017 (schedule 4), Blue (mountain) hares cannot lawfully be shot with automatic or semi-automatic weapons with a magazine capable of holding more than two rounds of ammunition. Under the Game Act 1831, hares cannot be shot on a Sunday or Christmas Day.Scotland13.56 On 1 March 2021, mountain hare was added to Schedule 5 of the Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981 (as amended) and so have full protection. This means, for example, that anyone who intentionally or recklessly kills, injures or takes mountain hare without a licence will be acting unlawfully. A new licensing scheme for mountain hare is now available for persons wanting to kill or take mountain hare: Hares and licensing | NatureScot. Please note the legislative requirements for brown hare have not changed.128
Guide on Firearms Licensing Law13.57 In Scotland it is an offence to intentionally or recklessly kill, injure or take brown hare in their close season as per sections 10A and 10B of the Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981, as inserted by the Wildlife and Natural Environment (Scotland) Act 2011. It is possible to obtain a licence to control brown hare during their close season.The close season for brown hare is 1 February – 30 September inclusive. The close season may be varied by Scottish Ministerial order.13.58 Defences are available for shooting in the close season – mercy killing, rehabilitation, or to prevent serious damage to property (including growing timber and crops) – although restrictions apply.13.59 Poaching hares and rabbits is further legislated for in Scotland – it is illegal to intentionally or recklessly kill, injure or take brown hare and rabbit unless you have the right to do so or the permission of someone with the right to do so.13.60 There is a defence if the animal is disabled and will not recover, provided the injury to the animal was not caused by the illegal act of the person killing the disabled animal.13.61 It is also illegal to kill or take mountain hare using semi-automatic or automatic weapons with a magazine capable of holding more than two rounds of ammunition without a licence since this animal is listed on Schedule 3 of the Conservation (Natural Habitats, &c.) Regulations 1994 (as amended in Scotland).Night Shooting of Ground Game13.62 The relevant provisions are:England and Wales13.63 The use of firearms at night for shooting ground game is prohibited under section 6 of the Ground Game Act 1880 – night-time is between the expiration of the first hour after sunset and the last hour before sunrise. Schedule 7 of the Wildlife & Countryside Act 1981 provides an exemption for occupiers of land, or one other person authorised by them, to use firearms at night for the purpose of killing ground game if the occupier has the written authority of a person entitled to kill or take the ground game on that land, that is the holder of the shooting rights.Scotland13.64 Section 50 of the Agriculture (Scotland) Act 1948, which also prohibited shooting at night (Section 50 of the Agriculture (Scotland) Act 1948 defines night as “between the expiration of the first hour after sunset and the commencement of the last hour before sunrise). Additionally, Schedule 7 of the Wildlife & Countryside Act 1981 provides as follows:1. it is not unlawful for the owner of shooting rights on any land, or any person holding those rights from them, or the occupier (subject to 2 below) to use a firearm for the purpose of killing ground game thereon at night;129
Guide on Firearms Licensing Law2. the occupier of any land shall not use a firearm to kill ground game at night unless (except where they have the exclusive right) they have first obtained written authority of the other person or one of the other persons entitled to kill and take ground game on the land;3. an occupier who is entitled to use a firearm for the purpose of killing ground game may, subject to the provisions of section 1 of the Ground Game Act 1880, authorise one other person to use a firearm.Badgers13.65 The Protection of Badgers Act 1992 (as amended) makes it a criminal offence to wilfully kill, take or injure badgers except in limited circumstances (for example, as a mercy killing, as an incidental result of a lawful action or under a licence issued by the appropriate wildlife licensing agency). If badgers are to be killed by a firearm, this must be done with a smooth-bore weapon of not less than 20 bore or a rifle using ammunition having a muzzle energy of at least 160 foot-pounds and a bullet weighing not less than 38 grains. This is in accordance with section 2(1)(d) of the 1992 Act.Dogs13.66 Section 9 of the Animals Act 1971provides a defence in any civil proceedings for killing or injuring a dog if the defendant acted to protect livestock, and subsequently informs the police within forty-eight hours of the incident. The defendant can only act in defence of livestock in such a way if the livestock, or the land on which it is, belongs to them or to any other person under whose express or implied authority they are acting. Note that the Animal Act 1971 does not extend to Scotland – see section 13(4).Pests Act 195413.67 Under the Pests Act 1954, and the Rabbit Clearance Order number 148, the whole of England and Wales, apart from the City of London, the Isles of Scilly and Skokholm Island, has been declared a rabbit clearance area. Within this area, occupiers of land have a continuing obligation to kill or take any wild rabbits living on, or resorting to, their land, or to prevent the rabbits from causing damage elsewhere by, for example, fencing them in with rabbit-proof fencing. Failure to fulfil these obligations may lead to the occupier being prosecuted or the work carried out at their expense.Control of Seals13.68 Legislation relating to seals is to be found in the Conservation of Seals Act 1970 and Schedule 9 of the Fisheries Act 2020, together with Orders made by DEFRA. In the UK, as of 1 March 2021, it is an offence to intentionally or recklessly kill, injure or take a seal. In Scotland, the 1970 Act has been repealed and the protection of seals is now secured under Part 6 of the Marine (Scotland) Act 2010.130
Chapter 14: Permits
Guide on Firearms Licensing Law
14.1 This chapter outlines the legal authority that allows chief officers of police to issue permits, and then goes on to explain the various forms used for different types of permits, and the terms that should be specified on issue. Visitor’s firearm and shot gun permits are dealt with separately in Chapter 26.Introduction14.2 Chief officers of police are authorised by section 7 of the 1968 Act to issue permits in circumstances when it would not be appropriate to issue a firearm or shot gun certificate, or to register a person as a firearms dealer. A permit can only be issued in respect of firearms and ammunition to which sections 1 or 2 of the 1968 Act apply, which the applicant for the renewal of a certificate or, in the case of a surviving relative or receiver, the previous holder of the certificate, was authorised to possess under section 1 of the Act. For example, a permit should be issued to authorise the temporary possession of firearms or ammunition by a relative or the executor of a deceased person or the receiver or liquidator of a bankrupt.14.3 A permit may not be issued to authorise the purchase or acquisition of firearms or ammunition (although section 5(1) of the Firearms (Amendment) Act 1988 allows the holder of a permit to purchase section 2 shot gun ammunition). Firearms that are subject to section 5 of the 1968 Act, (for example firearms held under sections 2 to 8 of the 1997 Act), cannot be held on a permit. Chief officers should complete basic background checks (PNC, local Intel and consider PND) to ensure the suitability of the applicant if it does not involve an existing certificate holder.14.4 Permits should be issued by chief officers where a certificate has not been re- issued or where a variation has been delayed and the applicant has made the application in good time. This may be appropriate where the renewal of a certificate is so delayed that the applicant may otherwise be left without permission to continue possessing and using their firearm and ammunition. This may not be the case where the applicant or his referees had been uncooperative and, is, or are, substantially responsible for the delay. In these circumstances, the applicant should be advised to arrange for the firearms and ammunition to be placed in storage with a registered firearms dealer or another suitably authorised certificate holder.14.5 Permits may also be issued by chief officers to allow an individual to have a firearm in his/her possession for reasons such as the disposal of a firearm that has been removed from an individuals firearm certificate or reasons such as when an individual is found to no longer have a "good reason" to possess the weapon or they are in the process of selling/transferring the firearm to another authorised person or firearms dealer. In these circumstances chief officers may wish to consider issuing a short term temporary permit (valid for two months) to enable the individual to dispose of the firearm.131
Guide on Firearms Licensing LawTypes of permit14.6 The various forms for issuing permits are:i) Form 111, this authorises, under section 7(1) of the 1968 Act, the possession (unless the terms indicate otherwise) of firearms and ammunition to which section 1 of the 1968 Act applies. The permit must give details of the firearms and ammunition it covers, and must show the date on which it expires.ii) Form 112 is similar to Form 111 but related to shot guns. It should specify the shot guns to which it relates (see paragraph 14.3 about the purchase of section 2 ammunition). This permit does not allow the possession of Section 5(1A)(a) disguised shot guns held on a shot gun certificate as part of a collection.iii) Form 213. Issued under section 9(2) of the 1968 Act, permits an auctioneer to sell by auction, expose for sale by auction, or have their possession for sale by auction, the firearms, ammunition, shot guns and/or air weapons specified in the permit until the date of expiry shown on the permit.iv) Form 115 may be issued, under section 13(1)(c) of the 1968 Act, to authorise the removal of a firearm (but not ammunition) from a ship or hovercraft for any purpose specified in the permit (for example, for repair or servicing, sale, breaking up, return to store, or removal to another ship or hovercraft). It may also authorise the removal of a firearm to a ship or hovercraft (for example after repair or from store). The place to or from which the firearm is to be removed should be specified in the permit. Without such a permit, it is an offence to bring a firearm ashore even for repair. There is no legal definition for what constitutes a “ship”, and in the absence of a Court ruling, it is generally taken to mean a vessel designed as ocean-going rather than one designed to travel on inland waterways.14.7 The permit should only be issued to the owner or charterer of the ship or hovercraft, the owner or charterer’s agent, a responsible officer of the ship or hovercraft or a person nominated by one of the aforesaid persons. While the provisions of section 13(1)(c) of the 1968 Act are not limited to firearms forming part of the ship’s or hovercraft’s equipment, a permit should in general only be issued in respect of firearms which are genuinely part of the ship or hovercraft’s equipment, and it should be issued only if the police are satisfied as to the purpose for which the firearm is being removed and the proposed destination of the firearm. In some circumstances, for example where a ship is docked for extensive repair, the ship has been impounded or for some other reason the captain and crew cannot stay aboard, and where there are concerns about security, it might be appropriate to accede to a request to take such a firearm on shore for temporary secure-keeping. Form 115 may also be issued, under section 13(1)(c) of the 1968 Act, to authorise the removal of signalling apparatus from or to an aircraft or aerodrome for any purpose specified in the permit.132
Terms of permit
Guide on Firearms Licensing Law
14.8 It will normally be appropriate to issue permits under sections 7(1) and 9(2) of the 1968 Act subject to suitable terms. The terms of permits should be as follows, taking account of the individual circumstances in each case:In the case of permits relating to firearms and (section 1) ammunition, the person to whom the permit has been issued should:i. inform the chief officer of police at once of the name and address of any person, other than a registered firearms dealer, purchasing or acquiring any of the abovementioned firearms and ammunition.In all cases the person to whom the permit has been issued should:i. immediately inform the chief officer of police by whom the permit was granted, of the theft, loss, destruction or deactivation of any firearm, ammunition or shot gun to which the permit relates;ii. at all times take reasonable precautions to ensure the safe custody of the firearms, ammunition or shot guns to which the permit relates;iii. return the permit to the chief officer of police on or before expiry date; andiv. on written request, return the permit to the chief officer of police without delay.133
Guide on Firearms Licensing LawChapter 15: Registration of firearms dealers15.1 This chapter covers the following:i. the requirement for the police to keep a register of firearms dealers;ii. the means by which applications to go on the register are considered;iii. the form and conditions of registration;iv. the certificates of registration themselves;v. information on police inspection of those registered;vi. removal from the register; andvii. the requirement placed on dealers to notify transfers.This chapter should be read alongside the Statutory Guidance for Chief Officers of Police.Definition of registered firearms dealer15.2 A dealer is defined at Section 57(4) of the 1968 Act as a person or a corporate body who, by way of trade or business: manufactures, sells, transfers, repairs, tests or proves firearms or ammunition to which section 1 of that Act applies, or shot guns; or sells or transfers air weapons. Firearms dealers are not authorised to trade in prohibited weapons without the Secretary of State’s or Scottish Minister’s authority (see paragraphs 15.33 to 15.37).15.3 If the person trading is a body corporate, that body and not a servant or officer of the company must be registered as a dealer. Failure to do so may result in offences being committed by those who trade with the body corporate. Where the registration is made in the name of an officer or servant of the company, the person registered should be the body corporate. It is important that the status of the applicant be clearly and correctly established and that the correct ‘person’ is properly registered.Statutory requirement to keep a register of firearms dealers15.4 Under section 33(1) of the 1968 Act, chief officers of police are required to keep in the prescribed form a register of firearms dealers in their area. The prescribed form of register is set out in Part III of Schedule 5 of the Firearms Rules 1998.134
Guide on Firearms Licensing LawApplications to go on the register of firearms dealers15.5 Section 33(2) requires the chief officer of police to enter in the register the name of any persons (including bodies corporate) who having or proposing to have a place of business in the area, applies to be registered as a firearms dealer unless:(a) they are prohibited by a court under section 45 of the Act from being registered;(b) the chief officer of police is satisfied that they cannot be permitted to carry on business as dealers in firearms without danger to the public safety or to the peace; or(c) the chief officer of police is not satisfied that the applicant will engage in business as dealers in firearms to a substantial extent or as an essential part of other trades, businesses or profession.Game fairs and other temporary events15.6 Firearms dealers wishing to carry on business, including exhibiting for the purposes of their business, at game fairs, arms fairs etc. in another force area must be registered by the chief officer of police for that area and are required to pay the appropriate fee to register a temporary place of business. Contact between the police areas involved should help to expedite decisions on such applications. NFLMS is now configured in England and Wales to allow the issue of a standard three-year RFD certificate for the purpose of participating in annual game or trade fairs. Conditions specifically relating to the event will be placed upon the certificate. The decision to allow the RFD certificate to stay in force for the full three years or for only the duration of a single event is at the discretion of chief officers. Authority granted for ad hoc attendance or one-off events should include set-up and take down time and be site specific. Please note that NFLMS does not apply in Scotland.Form of Register of transactions15.7 Although section 40 of the 1968 Act and Rule 10(4) of the Firearms Rules 1998 (as amended by the Firearms (Amendment) Rules 2007) lay down the information required to be entered into the Register of transactions, the form of the Register is not prescribed. It may be kept by means of a computer (section 40(4) of the 1968 Act).15.8 Section 3(1)(c) of the 1968 Act (as amended by section 31 of the Violent Crime Reduction Act 2006) makes it an offence for anyone to sell or transfer an air weapon, including component parts and accessories (see Chapter 12) by way of trade or business unless they are registered with the police as a firearms dealer under section 33 of the 1968 Act. In accordance with section 58(2) of the 1968 Act, it will not be necessary to register as a dealer where sales or transfers involve only antique air weapons which are kept as curiosities or ornaments (see Chapter 8). Dealers are not required to keep records of air weapon ammunition sales.135
Guide on Firearms Licensing Law15.9 For those dealers who keep paper records there are a number of commercially produced registers on the market which take the form of a bound volume with numbered pages for individual transactions laid out across the double pages. Acquisitions on the left hand page and the corresponding disposal entries opposite. Firearms dealers are encouraged to purchase such registers but in any event the actual register used should conform to that design. Exercise books and card index systems will not be accepted. Whilst firearms dealers can continue to keep paper- based records we would continue to recommend the use of computerised records as a matter of best practice.15.10 For records kept by means of a computer, the legislation (section 40(4A) of the 1968 Act) requires that the information required by law can be readily produced in a form which is visible and legible and can be taken away. Daily backups of data should be taken and then stored in such a way as to preserve its integrity in a disaster situation. Alternatively the system should produce a daily hard copy of transactions, dated and page numbered so that there is an effective paper trail. In order to reduce the risk of fraud, dealers should be encouraged to establish procedures involving and identifying separation of duties and accountability and to show by whom and when the daily register record was created, updated or amended.15.11 Section 39 of the 1997 Act requires dealers records relating to firearms to be maintained for not less than 20 years from the date on which they are first entered onto the register.15.12 Firearms dealers should also be encouraged to keep separate records for firearms, ammunition, repairs and prohibited weapons. In the last case this will be a condition of the grant of the Secretary of State’s authority.Certificates of registration15.13 Section 33(4) of the 1968 Act provides that, when registered, a dealer shall be granted a certificate of registration. The Act does not provide for a prescribed form of certificate. A suitable template is available for use on the National Firearms Licensing Management System, which forces in England and Wales will be required to use.15.14 Form 117 constitutes the certificate of registration for the dealer and lists all the premises from which the dealer operates within that police area and any conditions imposed on the principal place of business.15.15 Form 118 is for any conditions imposed on other premises and a separate copy is completed for each premises. Forces will wish to record the issue of the certificate(s) upon the entry for each dealer in the main register. The form of certificate of registration provides for two identification numbers; the number of the entry in the register of dealers and the serial number of the certificate. The number of the entry in the register of dealers has been found useful for reference by both police and dealers and it is desirable that this number should be quoted in the certificate of registration in addition to the serial number of the certificate.136
Guide on Firearms Licensing LawBorder Policing Command of the NCA15.16 Under a Joint Agreement with the police, Border Policing Command of the National Crime Agency (NCA) has a role with the inland control of firearms dealers. This requires those concerned in whatever way with the import and export of firearms and other goods to produce for inspection, records and transaction documentation in order to counter and deter illicit imports and diverted exports.15.17 Border Policing Command of the NCA conducts its own programme of inspections, which are carried out on a risk assessed basis. Forces and Border Policing Command are encouraged, in order to minimise interference with legal trade, to make joint visits where possible.15.18 The benefits of close co-operation between firearms licensing departments and FXOs is that a clear and coherent approach to local firearm control and enforcement responsibilities can be formulated which will lead to avoidance of any apparent duplication of control effort and, through sharing of intelligence, early identification of suspect activity.Removal from register of dealer’s name or place of business15.19 It is undesirable to retain on the register a person who is no longer carrying on business as a firearms dealer in the police area. Having given reasonable notice, a chief officer of police shall remove a name from the register on this ground or because of danger to the public safety or to the peace. Where a name is removed from the register, the chief officer should write to the applicant setting out the grounds for this action. The chief officer may also remove a dealer from the register if the dealer is the subject of a court order under section 45(1) of the 1968 Act. However, the chief officer may not act in the matter during the period allowed for an appeal if the court has suspended the operation of the order pending the appeal (section 45(3) of the Act).15.20 It follows that the chief officer of police will need to write twice to any firearms dealer who is to be removed from the register. The first letter will give reasonable notice (usually 21 days) of the chief officer’s intention and allow time for the firearms dealer to make any representations; if the dealer is unsuccessful in this regard the chief officer’s second letter will confirm that removal action has been effected.15.21 A valid notice of appeal cannot be lodged with the Crown Court or Sheriff Court in Scotland until after the second letter has been issued, as it is the decision to remove from the register that triggers the right of appeal, as opposed to the chief officer’s letter indicating that he is proposing to make such a decision. The removal of their name from the register will preclude the appellant from carrying on business as a firearms dealer unless their appeal is allowed.15.22 It should be noted that the certificate of registration merely provides evidence that a dealer’s name has been entered in the register. It does not, of itself, confer registration. Under section 45(1), a court may order that the name of the dealer be removed from the register; however under 45(3) a court may suspend the operation of its order pending appeal. If this is the case, a dealer’s name will remain on the137
Guide on Firearms Licensing Lawregister and therefore the dealer may lawfully trade. If a dealer is removed from the register under section 38, they may not continue to trade pending appeal. If appeal under section 38 is successful, the dealer will not have to surrender their certificate of registration, or their register of transactions, under section 38(8).Notification of Transfers15.23 In transferring firearms and shot guns to certificate holders, firearms dealers are obliged by section 32(2)(b) of the 1997 Act to comply with any instructions contained in the certificate produced. Those instructions require that notification, and details of the transaction be notified to the chief officer of police of the force which issued the certificate within 7 days.15.24 Section 42A and 42B of the 1968 Act specify the notification requirements. Accordingly, under section 42A(1), notification must be sent by ‘permitted means’. This includes notification via recorded or special delivery or by ‘permitted electronic means’. Where notification is sent electronically it must be to an existing electronic address. Firearms licensing departments wishing to receive notification electronically must therefore ensure that they have a working and secure email address. The exception to the notification requirements is in the case where information is sent to dealers and certificate holders, etc, by the police, the Secretary of State or Scottish Ministers. In those instances, notification by recorded and special delivery is permitted but notification by electronic communication can only be used where:ï the recipient has given a written statement to the body concerned that he accepts electronic notification. This may be limited to particular type of notice specifying the form(s) of communication and an electronic address for each form; andï the notice must be sent to the address specified for that form of electronic communication.15.25 When accepting a gun from a “person unknown” or when accepting an unlicensed gun, a dealer should notify the local police firearms licensing department. When firearms are handed in for destruction, the dealer should make the appropriate entry in his register and, if the person handing in the weapon is a certificate holder, he should be advised to notify the transaction in the ordinary way. When the dealer intends to destroy any such firearm he should advise the police so that they may be present if they so wish. Police should oversee the destruction if at all possible. Where this is not possible, the dealer should provide the police with some form of proof that the destruction took place.15.26 There is no legislative requirement to notify chief officers of police when transferring firearms to persons who are exempt for certification purposes, but again dealers are encouraged to do so with an explanation as to the exemption. Postal sales are no longer permitted other than to those who are exempt for certification purposes (including registered firearms dealers). The recipient dealer should show the weapon coming into the register and going out.138
Guide on Firearms Licensing Law“Remote” Sales15.27 “Remote” sales are those sales made when a registered firearms dealer (RFD) sells a firearm or shotgun to a purchaser who is not present at the moment of sale and wants the newly acquired firearm or shotgun sent to another RFD for collection. First and foremost the RFD selling the firearm must see the purchaser’s firearm or shotgun certificate before the sale is undertaken in accordance with section 3(2) of the Firearms Act 1968. Having checked the certificate, the RFD fills in the necessary details and returns it to the purchaser. Then, within 7 days, the RFD notifies the chief officer of police who issued the purchaser’s certificate. The notification must include a description of the firearm/shotgun. Having paid the RFD who sold the gun, the purchaser nominates a second dealer in a location where he or she wishes to take possession of it. The RFD arranging the transfer should obtain a copy of the second dealer’s certificate of registration The RFD who sold it will arrange for it to be forwarded accordingly and make the necessary entries in his Register recording the name of the new owner, their certificate number and the name of the dealer to whom it was sent for collection. On receipt, that dealer will contact the purchaser who will arrange to collect the gun in person. Before taking possession, the new owner must provide satisfactory proof of their identity and present the certificate which has been already completed with the details of the firearm. The purchaser must notify the transfer to his chief officer of police within 7 days and the RFD who handed the gun over will record the transfer in both the “In” and “Out” sections of his Register.15.28 The RFD network can also assist in the delivery of the firearm where a certificate holder wishes to sell to another certificate holder. The procedure is similar but in the first instance the onus is on the seller to see and check the purchaser’s certificate, fill in the necessary details before returning it and to notify his chief officer of police within 7 days of the sale. Having received payment, the seller takes the gun to an RFD who has agreed to arrange the transfer to a second dealer nominated by the purchaser to act on their behalf in effecting a face-to face transfer. The entry in the register only needs to reflect the temporary holding of the firearm: “FOR TRANSFER: destination Mr ..xxx.. and forwarded to RFD xxx for collection”. The RFD arranging the transfer should obtain a copy of the second dealer’s certificate of registration. On receipt of the firearm/shotgun, that dealer will contact the purchaser who will arrange to collect the gun in person, producing his completed certificate and proof of identity as above. The purchaser must notify the transfer to his chief officer of police within 7 days. The second dealer will record the transfer in both the “In” and “Out” sections of his Register. In these circumstances neither RFD is involved in filling in the certificate or notifying the police.Servants15.29 Section 8 of the 1968 Act mentions servants but there is no definition contained within the firearms legislation as to what constitutes “a servant”. The term has been interpreted differently by the courts in connection with a number of different pieces of legislation.15.30 Until such times as the situation can be resolved by a change to the primary legislation, the common dictionary meaning of “a person employed to work for139
Guide on Firearms Licensing Lawanother” should be used. In using this definition it is accepted that in some instances a “servant” will not receive actual “payment” for their employment.15.31 When transporting firearms and ammunition the servant should at all times carry a copy of their letter of authority together with a copy of the dealer’s certificate of registration. The notice does not of itself have legal status, and whether a person is acting as a dealer’s servant at the material time is a matter of fact and degree.15.32 Where a servant is under the age of 18, the provisions of section 22 of the Firearms Act 1968 on acquisition and possession of firearms by minors will apply.Section 5 authorities15.33 This authority allows dealers to possess, purchase or acquire, manufacture, sell or transfer prohibited weapons and prohibited ammunition as defined by section 5 of the 1968 Act.15.34 The authority is issued subject to any condition the Secretary of State or the Scottish Ministers may think fit for the purpose of securing that the prohibited weapons or ammunition will not endanger the public safety or the peace. The authority shall be in writing with any conditions specified on it. This will include the numbers and types of prohibited weapons and ammunition so authorised and all other conditions and relevant matters. Where such an authority has been granted, the chief officer of police cannot refuse registration on the grounds of danger to the public safety or to the peace.15.35 Those persons granted such authority will fall into three main groups:a) Those who possess, purchase, acquire, manufacture, sell or transfer – this group will be the subject of inspection and verification as registered firearms dealers. Frequency and levels of inspections should be set to the same levels as set out in the Statutory Guidance for Chief Officers of Police and should include all categories of prohibited weapons and ammunition authorised; orb) Those who only possess – this group will possess in connection with other activities, that is ammunition evaluation, armoured vehicle manufacture, ballistic tests, etc; orc) Those who only transport – this group is only responsible for the movement between authorised person and firms, and does not require any other certification. The movement and transport of prohibited weapons and ammunition by those persons/ companies authorised by the Secretary of State is subject to the conditions of that authority. The Home Office holds a current list of those so authorised and this can be provided upon request.15.36 In relation to some sales and transfers this may require checks and information from outside this country and the assistance of other government departments may be required, for example the import or export of items. Close liaison with the FXOs of the Border Policing Command of the NCA should be fostered and maintained. Where there are specific grounds for suspicion, the FXO will, on request, supply details of the consignors, and the quantity and type of firearms previously imported. Additionally, where the general credibility of entries in the Firearms Register are140
Guide on Firearms Licensing Lawbeing tested, the FXO will, on request, provide details of a selection of future importations.15.37 In checking registers/holdings, care should be taken in respect of those firearms which are subject to different controls depending on the circumstances in which they are held. Small firearms, for example, when held by a dealer are subject to section 5(1)(aba), but when they are possessed by a person holding a suitably conditioned firearm certificate become amenable to section 1 control. Great care and validation must be exercised in these cases. The information and matters in relation to sales and movement of prohibited items needs to be kept confidential given the potential of the items. The results of all visits and inspections will allow for a considered response to the Home Office or the Scottish Government Justice Department if the authority is to be renewed or amended by the Secretary of State, or the Scottish Ministers.Section 5 carriers15.38 Whilst a section 5 authority for a dealer will normally allow that dealer to transfer the firearms they are permitted to trade in, should that dealer want to trade in the transfer of firearms, they will need to apply to the Home Office for their authority to be varied accordingly.Stolen weapons/certificates15.39 In cases of lost or stolen firearms, forces should circulate details to all other forces for them to inform their own dealers. Firearms licensing departments should ensure that police officers are aware of and compliant with the stolen weapons/certificates facility on the PNC and NFLMS.141
Guide on Firearms Licensing LawChapter 16: Museum Firearms Licenses16.1 This chapter details what a museum firearms licence allows for and the conditions for its issue. It then covers applications, additional conditions, issue, variation and revocation of licences.What a museum licence allows16.2 Section 19 of, and the Schedule to, the Firearms (Amendment) Act 1988 provide for the issue to a museum of a museum firearms licence. The grant of a licence permits the persons responsible for the management of the museum and museum employees to possess, purchase or acquire, for the purposes of the museum:a) firearms and ammunition which are, or are to be, normally exhibited or kept on its premises, without holding a firearm certificate or shot gun certificate; andb) where the licence so provides, prohibited weapons and prohibited ammunition which are, or are to be, normally exhibited or kept as aforesaid, without the authority of the Secretary of State or Scottish Ministers under section 5 of the Firearms Act 1968 (as amended).Requirements for a museum licence to be issued16.3 A museum licence may be granted only to those major national museums listed in the Schedule or to any other museum or similar institution which either:a) has as its purpose, or one of its purposes, the preservation for the public benefit of a collection of historic, artistic or scientific interest which includes or is to include firearms; andb) which is maintained wholly or mainly out of money provided by Parliament or a local authority; orc) is accredited by the Museums, Libraries and Archives Council (MLA) or its successor bodies, Arts Council England, Arts Council of Wales or the Scottish Arts Council.Advice regarding museums and firearms may be obtained from the Museums Weapons Group (see Appendix 1).16.4 A museum licence cannot be granted to a non-accredited, privately funded museum. Nor can it be granted for the purposes of a private collection, whether such a collection is for the public benefit or otherwise. In such cases, the grant of a firearm or shot gun certificate should be considered.16.5 There is no bar to the disposal or transfer of Section 1 or 2 firearms by the holder of a museum firearms licence, but a museum licence does not provide for the disposal or transfer, temporary or otherwise, of prohibited weapons or142
Guide on Firearms Licensing Lawammunition. A separate application must be made to the Secretary of State or the Scottish Ministers for authority under section 5 of the 1968 Act.16.6 In most cases the publicly funded nature of a museum will be self-evident, but where doubt arises the Home Office or the Scottish Government can make enquiries of the museum authorities. Enquiries about accreditation may be made to:Arts Council England Head Office21 Bloomsbury Street LondonWC1B 3HFThe Arts Council of Wales Bute PlaceCardiff CF10 5ALThe Scottish Arts Council 12 Manor Place EdinburghEH3 7DDApplications for a museum licence16.7 In England and Wales, the Secretary of State is the issuing authority for museum licences. An application by a museum must be made via the online application system.In Scotland, the Scottish Ministers are the issuing authority for such licences. Applications for museums in Scotland must be made to the Scottish Government:Firearms TeamSafer Communities Division St Andrew’s House EdinburghEH1 3DGe-mail: firearms.enquiries@gov.scot16.8 Paragraph 1(3) of the Schedule to the 1988 Act requires the Secretary of State or the Scottish Ministers not to grant a museum licence unless they are satisfied, after consultation with the local chief officer of police, that the arrangements for keeping and exhibiting the firearms are, or will be, such as not to endanger public safety or the peace. Where a bona fide application has been received by the Home Office or the Scottish Government, a request will be made to the chief officer to verify that proper arrangements are in hand to ensure the safe custody of the firearms and/or ammunition.143
Guide on Firearms Licensing Law16.9 In general, the chief officer of police will be requested to undertake an inspection of museum premises to establish that adequate security measures have been taken and to provide a report to the Home Office or the Scottish Government. It should be noted that these inspections and reports should only cover arrangements for safe custody, and should include a review of an appropriate museum collections management system, they should not deal with the condition or physical state of exhibits. The latter are entirely a matter for the museum authorities. Many of the larger museums will of course have their own, experienced, security staff. In such cases, full consultation should take place with the appropriate museum staff in order to gain the benefit of their expertise. Further advice can be found in the Firearm Security Handbook 2020.Conditions that may be added to museum licences16.10 The Secretary of State or the Scottish Ministers may attach conditions to the museum licence relating to the safe custody of the firearms and ammunition in question. Such conditions will relate only to arrangements for safekeeping and not to the physical condition of the exhibits (see paragraph 16.9 above). The police report should therefore include any recommendations which the chief officer of police wishes to make concerning the appropriate conditions necessary to ensure the safe custody of the firearms and ammunition.16.11 A licence may be granted for all the museum’s buildings or for particular premises of the museum. If the museum has a number of separate premises and firearms are kept or displayed in only one of them, the licence will normally only be issued for the building in which the firearms are kept and/or displayed. The report should therefore make clear which premises the museum wishes to use for this purpose and the security inspection need relate only to those premises at which the licence will apply.Issue and renewal of museum licences16.12 Following consideration by the Home Office or the Scottish Government, the museum will be informed of whether the licence has been granted in principle by the Secretary of State or the Scottish Ministers. Museums in England and Wales will then be required to pay the specified fee payable for the grant of the licence using the details given in a direct request from the online application system. Museums in Scotland will be contacted by the Scottish Government about payment of the appropriate fee. The applicable fees for museum licence applications are set out within Chapter 19. Payments for Scottish museums should be sent to:Scottish Government Treasury and Banking Branch Mail Point 53A North Victoria Quay Leith Edinburgh EH6 6QQThe licence will be issued to the museum and copied to the chief officer of police.144
Guide on Firearms Licensing Law16.13 A museum licence is valid for a period of five years, subject to its revocation or cancellation. An application for renewal will follow the same procedure as for a grant. It is recommended best practice that applications for renewal should be made at least three months before the expiration of the previous licence.Variation of museum licences16.14 Paragraph 2 of the Schedule to the 1988 Act empowers the Secretary of State or the Scottish Ministers to vary, by notice in writing:a) the conditions specified in the licence held in respect of the museum; andb) the premises to which the licence applies.A notice under this section may require the persons responsible for the management of the museum to return the licence to the Secretary of State or the Scottish Ministers within 21 days so that the licence may be amended in accordance with the variation.16.15 A request for a variation may be made directly by the museum or may arise from new circumstances which come to light. For example, the museum may wish to use additional premises for the storage or display of firearms. In this case an application should be made in writing to the Home Office or the Scottish Government, who may then request that the police undertake an additional security inspection. On the other hand, circumstances may come to police notice which suggest that an additional condition to ensure safekeeping should be attached to the licence or that security arrangements for particular premises are no longer suitable. In such a case a full report on the circumstances, together with the recommendation of the chief officer of police, should be forwarded to the Home Office or the Scottish Government. Where difficulties arise, every effort should be made to consult fully with the museum authorities.16.16 Where a museum’s request to extend the licence to additional premises is granted, it will be issued subject to receipt of the relevant fee under paragraph 3A of the Schedule to the 1988 Act.Revocation of museum licences16.17 The Secretary of State and the Scottish Ministers are empowered (see paragraph 2 of the Schedule to the 1988 Act) to revoke a museum licence by notice in writing to the persons responsible for the management of a museum if:a) after consultation with the local chief officer of police, they are satisfied that the continuation of the exemption afforded by the licence would result in a danger to public safety or the peace; orb) the persons responsible for the management of the museum, or any servant of theirs, has been convicted of an offence under the Schedule to the 1988 Act; orc) those persons have failed to comply with a notice under paragraph 2 of the Schedule requiring them to return the licence to the Secretary of State or the Scottish Ministers.145
Guide on Firearms Licensing Law16.18 Should circumstances come to police attention which indicate that the continuation of a licence may give rise to a danger to public safety, details should be reported to the Home Office or the Scottish Government. Where a problem arises over security arrangements, the museum authorities should be approached in the first instance with a view to resolving any difficulty.16.19 A conviction need not of itself lead to revocation under paragraph 16.17(b) above. The Secretary of State or the Scottish Ministers will wish to take account of the circumstances surrounding any offences, the position in the organisation of any offender and the response of the museum authorities.16.20 Where a licence has been revoked, the Secretary of State or the Scottish Ministers will require, by notice in writing, the licence to be surrendered to them. It is an offence to fail to comply with such a notice.Offences and enforcement16.21 It is an offence under paragraph 4 of the Schedule to the 1988 Act:a) for a person to knowingly or recklessly make a statement false in any material particular for the purpose of the grant, renewal or variation of a licence; andb) for the person or any of the persons responsible for the management of the museum to fail to comply with or to cause or permit another person to fail to comply with any condition specified in the licence held in respect of the museum.16.22 A defence of due diligence is provided against a charge under (b) above (see paragraph 4(4) of the Schedule to the 1988 Act). Under paragraph 4(5) of the Schedule, where an offence under paragraph 4 committed by a body corporate is proved to have been committed with the consent or connivance of, or to be attributable to any neglect on the part of, any:a) director, manager, secretary or other similar officer of the body corporate, or;b) any person who was purporting to act in any such capacitythey, as well as the body corporate, shall be guilty of that offence and be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly. References to the persons responsible for the management of the museum are to the Board of Trustees, the governing body, or any other person exercising corresponding functions of management.146
Guide on Firearms Licensing LawChapter 17: Rifle and muzzle-loading pistol clubs, schools and cadet corps17.1. This chapter details:i. procedures for club approval;ii. issues such as the use of ranges, security of firearms and good practice in club administration;iii. information about the renewal of certificates, club inspections;iv. the requirement of the police to maintain a register of clubs within their force area; andv. how the Firearms Acts relate to cadet corps and school target shooting clubs.Introduction17.2 Applications for club approval are determined by the Secretary of State in England and Wales and by Scottish Ministers in Scotland.17.3 Members of a rifle club, miniature rifle club or muzzle-loading pistol club approved by the Secretary of State or the Scottish Ministers may, without holding firearm certificates, have in their possession firearms and ammunition when engaged as members of the club in, or in connection with, target shooting (section 15(1) of the Firearms (Amendment) Act 1988 as amended by section 45 of the 1997 Act). It should be noted that section 15(1) does not stipulate that the firearms must be club firearms. A member of an approved club may temporarily possess a firearm solely in connection with target shooting on the club’s range, or other ranges which it may use. However, a person cannot possess a firearm under this exemption if it is a class of firearm for which the club is not approved. It should also be noted that section 15(1) of the 1988 Act, as amended, does not apply to the use of long barrelled pistols or section 1 shot guns used for target shooting, as it only allows possession of rifles or muzzle-loading pistols by members of suitably approved clubs. Accordingly, club approval cannot be extended to cover the use of these firearms (see also paragraph 17.12).17.4 Members may not purchase or acquire firearms or ammunition unless they have been granted firearm certificates and the exemption does not cover the use of firearms for purposes other than target shooting. The case of R v Wilson (1989) held that possession of firearms and ammunition must only be in connection with the club’s activities, and does not give members a wider authority.17.5 Whether approved or not, miniature rifle clubs are exempt by virtue of section 11(4) of the 1968 Act. Under that subsection a person conducting or carrying on a miniature rifle range (whether for a rifle club or otherwise) or shooting gallery at which only miniature rifles and ammunition not exceeding .23 calibre or air weapons are used may, without a firearm certificate, purchase, acquire or possess such miniature rifles or ammunition for them. Whilst there is no legal definition of a147
Guide on Firearms Licensing Lawminiature rifle, other than one which does not exceed .23 inch in calibre, it is generally accepted that this refers only to rifles firing .22 rim-fire cartridges (see also Chapter 6). Persons using the range are exempt from holding a firearm certificate only whilst using such miniature rifles and ammunition at such a range or gallery. Home Office approval can only be granted to a miniature rifle club if it can adhere to the Home Office’s club criteria.Administration of clubs17.6 The Secretary of State and the Scottish Ministers attach great importance to the responsible administration of approved clubs and will wish to ensure that the criteria are complied with. Further information about the criteria for shooting club approval is available from the gov.uk website.Procedure for shooting club approval17.7 All applications for the approval or the renewal of the approval of the Secretary of State for shooting clubs in England and Wales must be made online, under shooting club applications.Clubs in Scotland should apply in writing to the:Firearms TeamSafer Communities Division St Andrew’s House EdinburgEH1 3DGe-mail: firearms.enquiries@gov.scot17.8 Renewal applications should be submitted to the Home Office using the online application portal at least three months before the previous approval expires. All applications must be completed by an official of the club; this will usually be the club secretary. Applications will be passed to the firearms licensing department of the police force for the area in which the club secretary or principal officer resides.17.9 The chief officer will arrange for a visit to take place whereby checks will be made to ensure firearm security is satisfactory. If the chief officer of police is satisfied that the club meets the criteria for approval the police will send a report to the Home Office. In cases in which enquiries indicate that there is no prospect of the club being able to meet the criteria for approval the police will also inform the Home Office with the reasons why they cannot recommend the grant of approval.17.10 Should a club not be immediately in a position to meet the criteria, but it appears that given time it will be, the club secretary or responsible officer should be advised of the shortcomings. The submission of the application should then be deferred until such time as the club has been able to remedy the deficiencies (to a maximum of six months from the date of the original application). Once the club’s arrangements meet the criteria, the club should apply online to the Home Office or in writing to the Scottish Government. Should the club not be in a position to meet148
Guide on Firearms Licensing Lawthe criteria at the end of the six months period, the chief officer will inform the Home Office or the Scottish Government why approval has not been recommended.17.11 In considering whether or not to grant an application for approval, the Secretary of State or the Scottish Ministers must satisfy themselves that, amongst other considerations:i. the club has regular use of ranges with financial arrangements in place to cover the losses to third parties and which are safe for the class of firearms for which approval is requested;ii. the security arrangements for the storage of club firearms and ammunition, where held, are satisfactory;iii. the application is being made by or on behalf of a bona fide club which is able to meet the criteria (see paragraph 17.6); andiv. there are no other considerations which would make the club unsuitable for approval.17.12 Club approval by the Secretary of State or the Scottish Ministers will only cover target shooting with the categories of firearm listed below:a) Full-bore rifles, including pistol calibre “gallery rifles” (not designed or adapted to fire ammunition capable of discharging projectiles at muzzle energies greater than 10,000 foot-pounds)b) Small-bore rifles; andc) Muzzle-loading pistols17.13 The decision about which categories will be included in the approval letter will be dependent upon whether suitable ranges are available to the club.Variation applications17.14 Applications for the change of club secretary, change of address or category of firearm for clubs situated in England and Wales must be submitted online, under shooting club applications.Applications for such variations for clubs based in Scotland should be made in writing to the:Firearms TeamSafer Communities Division St Andrew’s House EdinburgEH1 3DGe-mail: firearms.enquiries@gov.scotRanges149
Guide on Firearms Licensing Law17.15 The ranges which a club cites when applying for approval should be available for the club to use on a regular basis. As a guide, this would be a minimum of six occasions a year, although in some circumstances a lower frequency of use might be justified. It should be noted that civilian club bookings on military ranges may be cancelled, often at short notice, due to operational requirements and a growing Territorial force, so allowance should be made for changes beyond the club’s control. Readily available access to a suitable range in another part of the country might be sufficient to qualify for approval purposes depending on the circumstances.17.16 The responsibility rests firmly with range owners/operators to ensure that their range is constructed and maintained safely. Failure to do so will leave them liable under a range of legislation, such as the Occupiers’ Liability Act 1957, the Occupiers’ Liability (Scotland) Act 1960 and the Health & Safety at Work etc Act 1974. The National Rifle Association and National Small-Bore Rifle Association have a range inspection service.17.17 The club criteria (see paragraph 17.6) and certificate conditions include a requirement for owners/operators of ranges to have in place adequate financial arrangements to meet any injury or damage claims. In most cases this will be insurance cover. However, other arrangements are acceptable so long as they provide adequate cover. For example, some local authority ranges deposit a bond to cover their risk. Military ranges, which are regularly inspected, will normally cover their own risk.17.18 The level of cover will vary according to the nature of the range and the type of firearms used on it. As a guide, cover should normally be around £5 million for any one incident.17.19 The National Small-bore Rifle Association (NSRA) and the National Rifle Association (NRA) have established their own inspection and approval scheme for the ranges run by their affiliated member clubs.17.20 The NSRA and NRA have guidance available for their members on the safe construction of ranges. That guidance will be used by the organisations as the basis for their inspections and the issue of approvals. The NSRA and NRA have indicated that they are willing to make their inspection and approval service available to ranges not affiliated to either organisation. It is anticipated that most ranges will use the NSRA and NRA scheme. However, it is for each range owner/operator to decide what steps to take to ensure their range is safe.17.21 Police forces will need to satisfy themselves that ranges used by a club are safe and have adequate insurance or other financial cover. In many cases clubs will have an old-style military safety certificate or a NSRA/NRA approval letter, and/or an insurance certificate. However, responsibility for safety on the range lies with the owner/operator. The MOD remains responsible for the safety of the range construction for ranges under its control. It is not intended that police forces should become experts in range construction or to have to inspect ranges. However, the NSRA/NRA guidance will be available to police forces to refer to where the need arises.17.22 If a rifle or muzzle-loading pistol club seeking approval proposes to use a range situated on licensed premises, it is essential in view of the provisions of section 82150
Guide on Firearms Licensing Lawof the Licensing Act 2003 and the Licensing (Scotland) Act 2005, that the matter be considered by the licensing authority. The Secretary of State or the Scottish Ministers will withhold approval until they are informed by the chief officer of police concerned that the licensing authority has no objections to the situation and to the use of the range in general.Security of club firearms17.23 The club’s co-operation should be sought to ensure that the firearms and ammunition owned by the club are stored securely. The signatory of the club certificate (usually the club secretary) is ultimately responsible for the safekeeping of club firearms and ammunition, but they need not necessarily be present each time these are issued to or used by club members. It is also acceptable for members other than the firearm certificate holder, if the activity is clearly in connection with target shooting, to transport firearms to another club or authorised range for a competition or to a dealer for repair. It is advisable when transporting firearms as a member of a club to have some form of written authorisation from a club official (see also Chapter 21).Criteria for schools17.24 The approval criteria for school target shooting clubs differ significantly from the criteria found via the link in paragraph 17.6, and are as follows:i. target shooting with full or small-bore rifles should be an authorised school activity;ii. all aspects of shooting at the school must be under the control of one experienced person who is nominated by and responsible to the Head Teacher. This person must have personal experience of shooting with the firearms used by the club and at least one year’s experience of exercising control for the age group of pupils concerned;iii. the school must have regular use of ranges which are suitable for the categories of firearm to be used;iv. the security arrangements for storing the school firearms and ammunition must be satisfactory;v. all shooting activities, including the handling of firearms and ammunition, must be supervised at all times either by the responsible adult at the school, or by at least one other equally experienced person nominated by the Head Teacher, or by someone who is a coach with a qualification recognised by the NRA or NSRA;vi. shooting is normally available only to pupils and staff of the school, visiting teams from schools which have also been approved by the Secretary of State or the Scottish Ministers under section 15 of the Firearms (Amendment) Act 1988, full members of rifle clubs approved under that section, members of Cadet Corps or individuals who hold a personal firearm certificate and shoot in accordance with the terms of that certificate;151
Guide on Firearms Licensing Lawvii. the school does not allow shooting by guests on more than twelve days each year. On such occasions, only parents, guardians and other relatives of pupils of the school or other adults known to the person responsible for shooting, may handle firearms and ammunition. Guest members must be under constant one-to-one supervision when handling firearms and ammunition either by the responsible adult at the school, or another equally experienced person nominated by the Head Teacher, or someone who is a coach, or Range Conducting Officer with a qualification recognised by the NRA or NSRA. The Head Teacher or the responsible adult at the school must tell the local police about guest days at least 48 hours in advance;viii. the Head Teacher must appoint a person to act as liaison officer with the police and the chief officer of police must have confidence that this person can provide the police with such information as they require to ensure that shooting is conducted properly and gives no cause for concern;ix. the school will maintain a register of the attendance of all members together with details for each session of the firearms which they used and the competitions, if any, in which they took part;x. the school will inform the police of any holder of a firearm certificate who has ceased to be a member of the club;xi. the school will inform the police if any member who holds a firearm certificate has not attended a meeting for a year; andxii. there is nothing else that would make the school unsuitable for approval.Disclosure of information17.25 Under the terms of their approval, clubs are obliged to notify the police of any applications for membership, giving the applicant’s name and address and the outcome of any application. The police should acknowledge receipt of such notifications. The notes on the criteria for Home Office or Scottish Government approved club status indicate that clubs should make their own arrangements for assessing whether members or prospective members are of good character and that chief officer of police should not be asked to disclose whether or not someone has a criminal record. Nevertheless, notification will enable the police to take prompt action where the applicant is found to be a prohibited person or is considered not to be a suitable person to be issued with a firearm certificate.17.26 Current legislation/common law does not allow for the disclosure by the police to a shooting club of personal details of a member, or prospective member, unless the information is needed to prevent (or detect) a crime, or to enable the apprehension or prosecution of an offender. If, for example, an applicant is a prohibited person, an offence could have taken place and the club’s full co-operation would be required to provide evidence for any prosecution under section 21 of the 1968 Act. If it is necessary to disclose the prohibition in order to investigate the matter it would be lawful to do so. If an individual is judged to be unsuitable for other reasons, the club liaison officer should be formally so notified in a timely manner. If a club is not advised of unsuitability, it is unlikely to refuse or terminate membership until after an incident has occurred. The club liaison officer or other club official may152
Guide on Firearms Licensing Lawthen inform the applicant that the police consider him to be unsuitable as a firearm certificate holder, and may refuse the application. In doing so the applicant should be given the contact details of the police firearms licensing department to enable them to make representations.17.27 The police must notify a club if a member’s firearm certificate is revoked or refused. In addition, clubs should be told in general terms of the reason for the revocation or refusal in order that they can make an informed decision whether to allow the member to continue shooting as a member of the club.Grant of approval17.28 If an application for the Secretary of State or the Scottish Ministers’ approval is granted, a letter of approval will be sent to the applicant (club secretary). A copy of the approval will also be sent to the chief officer of police. A decision to withhold approval will be notified in the same way.Fees for shooting club approvals17.29 Part 3 of The Firearms (Fees) Regulations 2019 (SI 2019/1169) sets out the fees payable to the Home Office or Scottish Government before an approval under section 15 of the Firearms (Amendment) Act 1988 is granted, varied or renewed. The fees are replicated in Chapter 19.17.30 The fees cannot be charged on a “pro rata” basis for authorisations of shorter duration. Refunds are not available after an approval has been granted.17.31 The Home Office or the Scottish Government will determine the category an application falls under, in accordance with the legislation, and will process the application accordingly, charging the relevant fee.17.32 Fees for all club approvals are invoiced when a decision has been made on an application but before the letter of approval is issued. Invoices are sent via email to the invoicing contact on the application form.17.33 Fees for shooting clubs in England and Wales should be paid to the Home Office by one of the following methods:ï Bankers Automated Clearing Service (BACS).ï Clearing House Automated Payment System (CHAPS).ï Credit or debit card.17.34 Please ensure when making a payment that your invoice number is included in the reference section of your bank transfer. Please send any remittance advice to:Shared Service Connected Limited HO Box 5003Newport NP20 9BB153
Guide on Firearms Licensing Law17.35 For Scotland, invoices will be sent by post to the contact on the application. Fees can be paid to the Scottish Government by one of the following methods:ï Bankers Automated Clearing Service (BACS)ï Clearing House Automated Payment System (CHAPS)ï Debit cardï ChequeVisit www.gov.scot/payments.17.36 Please ensure when making a payment that your invoice number is included in the reference section of your bank transfer. Please send any remittance advice to:Treasury and Banking Section Mail Point 123A North Victoria Quay EdinburghEH6 6QQFree firearm certificates for approved clubs17.37 Although a fee is payable, as set out above, for the grant, renewal or variation of the Secretary of State or Scottish Ministers’ approval under section 15 of the Firearms (Amendment) Act 1988, no fee is payable for a firearm certificate granted to the responsible officer of any club approved by the Secretary of State or the Scottish Ministers relating to firearms and ammunition to be used solely for target shooting by members of the club (section 32(2) of the 1968 Act). Similarly, no fee is payable for the variation or renewal of such a certificate. The exemption does not extend to certificates given for firearms not mentioned in a club’s approval. Responsible officers of approved clubs who are granted firearm certificates should be reminded of the necessity for strict compliance with the law confining the exemption allowed to members.17.38 The notes to the Secretary of State and the Scottish Ministers’ letter of approval state that the chief officer of police must be informed if the club wishes to use an alternative or additional range regularly (this does not apply to regular competitions between approved clubs). Changes of club secretary or club title or premises must also be notified.17.39 There is no need for the Secretary of State or the Scottish Ministers to be kept informed of the ranges being used by an approved club. It is sufficient for the chief officer to inform the Home Office or the Scottish Government when a club loses the use of a suitable range and consideration might have to be given to the withdrawal or variation of the Secretary of State or the Scottish Ministers’ authority.17.40 Letters of approval are issued in the name of the club and state the club secretary’s and another designated responsible officer’s name and address. Where a change of club secretary or other designated responsible officer has occurred, details of the new secretary or responsible officer, giving their full name and address, should be notified to the Home Office and Scottish Government as soon as possible. Failure to do so within fourteen days of the change could lead to the club’s approval by the Home Office or Scottish Government being withdrawn. If both the secretary and154
Guide on Firearms Licensing Lawthe other designated responsible officer are both unable to fulfil their role, members of the club can continue to shoot using only those firearms held on their personal firearm certificates. In such cases, any firearms owned and held on the club firearm certificate cannot be used until a new approval letter has been issued. The new approval letter should be issued as soon as possible, if possible with no gap in the change over dates, in order that competition deadlines can be met.Subsequent checks on approved clubs17.41 Rifle and muzzle-loading pistol clubs approved by the Secretary of State or the Scottish Government are required by section 15(7) of the Firearms (Amendment) Act 1988 to allow any constable or civilian officer duly authorised in writing to enter any premises occupied or used by the club and to inspect those premises and anything on them to ascertain whether the provisions of section 15 and any limitations or conditions in the approval are being complied with. The inspection should establish that the standard of the organisation and membership of the club remains satisfactory.17.42 The club’s attendance register should also be checked to confirm that all members with personal firearm certificates are regularly attending and that the club’s return of members who have not shot with them for twelve months is accurate. The frequency of use of ranges will vary depending on the club’s individual circumstances. These will include the proximity of the nearest suitable range and the ease with which bookings can be made. Target shooters may be expected to use their firearms regularly, at least three times a year or provide a good reason that this has not been the case. This is not the case for firearms held for other reasons such as collecting or deerstalking. Historic arms may be held for occasional use, in order to avoid excess wear on old artefacts.17.43 Where problems arise with the running of a club, which are not resolved by local discussion, and which might result in the withdrawal of the club’s approval, the facts should be reported without delay to the Home Office or the Scottish Government. In most circumstances, representations on the matters raised may be invited from the club secretary by the Home Office or the Scottish Government.Extension of club approval17.44 Applications for the approval of a club under section 15 of the Firearms (Amendment) Act 1988 to be extended to cover additional categories of firearm should be submitted on the online application system under the same procedure as set out in paragraph 17.7. A fee is payable for the extension of an approval.Club renewals17.45 Section 15(5) of the 1988 Act provides that an approval under that section shall, unless withdrawn, continue in force for six years from the date on which it was granted. The approval may be renewed for a further six years on application. Applications should be submitted on the online application system under the same procedure as set out in paragraph 17.7. A fee is payable for the renewal of an approval.155
Guide on Firearms Licensing LawPolice records17.46 Chief officers of police should maintain an index of all clubs situated in their police force area approved under section 15(1) of the Firearms (Amendment) Act 1988. Details of the club’s secretary and police liaison officer should be recorded and maintained. The index can be used as a reference point when dealing with applications for personal firearm certificates though this will not remove the need to contact the secretary or other officer in all such cases.Combined Cadet Force, Sea Cadet Corps, Army Cadet Force and Air Training Corps17.47 Cadets are regarded as Crown Servants for the purposes of the Firearms Acts and are exempt from the requirement to possess a firearm certificate when shooting as a member of the corps. Furthermore, firearms may be acquired for the corps by a responsible officer duly authorised in writing by the unit’s commanding officer without the need for a firearm certificate (section 54(2)(a) of the 1968 Act).Retention of club members’ records17.48 Clubs should retain members’ details/records for six years following cancellation of membership.156
Guide on Firearms Licensing LawChapter 18: Security of Firearms and Ammunition18.1 This chapter provides information about the secure keeping of firearms and ammunition, referring to other sources of more detailed information where appropriate. It sets out the security issues for chief officers of police to consider when dealing with certificate applications, renewals or variations. Information about the storage of explosives and black powder is the responsibility of the Health and Safety Executive and advice may be obtained from police explosives liaison officers.18.2 The Firearms Rules 1998 prescribe safe keeping conditions on firearm and shot gun certificates. They create two levels of security:(a) Rule 3(4)(iv)(a) provides for the firearms and ammunition to which the certificate relates to be stored securely at all times except as provided in paragraph (b), so as to prevent, as far as is reasonably practicable, access by an unauthorised person; and(b) Paragraph (b) lists the circumstances in which the security requirements of paragraph (a) do not apply:i. when the firearms or ammunition are in use;ii. when certificate holders have the firearm with them for cleaning, repairing or testing it or in connection with its use, transfer or sale; oriii. for some other purpose connected with its use, transfer or sale; oriv. the firearm or ammunition is in transit in connection with any of these purposes.18.3 Under the circumstances in paragraph (b) the certificate holder must take reasonable precautions for the safe custody of the firearms or ammunition. Further detail is set out below in Appendix 7 of this guidance and in the Firearms Security Handbook, produced jointly in 2020 by the Firearms and Explosives Working Group, the National Police Chiefs Council in England, Wales and Scotland, and the British Shooting Sports Council.18.4 A similar safekeeping condition appears on a shot gun certificate. The only difference is that the condition does not extend to shot gun cartridges, although it is advisable to store them safely.Secure Storage18.5 The Firearms Security Handbook referred to above provides advice on security measures appropriate to different types of firearms and ammunition in different circumstances. While the requirements to keep firearms securely are statutory, there are no statutory provisions on how this duty should be discharged.157
Guide on Firearms Licensing LawThe Firearms Rules18.6 The Rules do not prescribe the form of safekeeping or security. As with most aspects of crime prevention, the police must look at the individual circumstances of each case and at the overall security arrangements that will be in place. The level of security should be proportionate to the risk and each case must be judged on its merits. A firearm is like any other property which needs protecting from the burglar/housebreaker or thief. Advice should be balanced and reasonable as well as comprehensive.18.7 Section 24ZA of the 1968 Act, as inserted by section 46 of the Crime and Security Act 2010, makes it an offence for a person in possession of an air weapon to fail to take “reasonable precautions” to prevent someone under the age of eighteen from gaining unauthorised access to it. This does not require the holder to use gun cabinets, but they must take reasonable steps to prevent those under the age of eighteen from having unsupervised access to their air weapons. Those aged fourteen to seventeen may use air weapons unsupervised on private premises where they have permission (see Chapter 7).Factors for consideration18.8 These include the following:a) A risk assessment based on the levels of property crime in the area. These may be subject to sudden temporary changes and it is helpful to look at the longer-term trends of property crime in an area, which are the more important factors;b) The remoteness or otherwise of the premises, and the potential response to calls for assistance, either by police or neighbours;c) The manner in which the property is overlooked and/or illuminated. These levels of natural surveillance afford the property a degree of protection;d) The amount of time during which the property is occupied or left unoccupied;e) The location of storage points within the property and, where appropriate, the distribution of firearms within each secure point;f) The attractiveness of the type of firearms to criminals. For example, modern multi-shot handguns may be more attractive to criminals than most other types of gun;g) The number of firearms held; andh) Whether it is generally known that firearms are stored on the premises.158
Guide on Firearms Licensing LawThe certification procedure18.9 Security questions will be a key consideration when applications are made for the grant of a firearm or shot gun certificate. At such times the applicant will be seeking advice about the best security arrangements and this will provide a valuable opportunity to provide advice in the light of the circumstances prevailing at the time. If there is any doubt about the adequacy of security the chief officer of police may take this into account before issuing a certificate.18.10 Renewals or variations of firearm certificates, or the renewal of a shot gun certificate, provide further opportunities to assess security and safety. In practice there is unlikely to be a need for significant change if the recommendations were accepted and implemented, and there has been no subsequent change in circumstances.Unannounced Home Visits18.11 Where it is judged necessary, based on specific intelligence in light of a particular threat, or risk of harm, the police should undertake an unannounced home visit to check the security of a certificate holder’s firearms and shot guns. It is not expected that the police will undertake an unannounced home visit at an unsocial hour unless there is a justified and specific requirement to do so on the grounds of crime prevention or public safety concerns and the police judge that this action is both justified and proportionate.18.12 Paragraph 22.3 of this guidance sets out the power of entry, subject to warrant, available to the police. While this is an important power, it should not be necessary to use in all cases where inspections/home visits are required as such enquiries or inspections may be carried out with the certificate holder’s consent. It is expected that responsible certificate holders will co-operate with reasonable requests to inspect security arrangements or other aspects of suitability, and failure to do so may be taken into account when police consider suitability to possess the firearms. To mitigate any misunderstanding on the part of the certificate holder the police must provide a clear and reasoned explanation to the certificate holder at the time of the visit.Applying this guide18.13 This guide should be applied with full regard to the individual circumstances and the type and location of the premises subject to recommendations. This summary relates to the situations relative to firearm or shot gun certificate holders.18.14 No security suggestion must be made in respect of a window or other opening which has been provided as an emergency escape that will in any way prevent the immediate and unobstructed use of that escape route.18.15 If there is reason to believe that there is a conflict between the need for firearms security and the safety of persons in that building, then advice must be sought.159
Guide on Firearms Licensing Law18.16 Some situations and locations are such that these general principles cannot or do not provide the security commensurate with the risk. Every case must be judged on its individual merits.18.17 The term “unauthorised access” has been held to include the constructive possession that can occur where persons other than the certificate holder have access to the keys for security devices, as well as access gained by criminal entry to the premises etc. Thus any keys to any security device should be kept secure, with access limited to authorised persons. This is especially important if there are children present in the premises. Knowledge by an unauthorised person of the location of the keys or to the combination to the locks may lead to a breach of the statutory security condition. In the case of Regina v Chelmsford Crown Court, Ex parte Farrer (2000) it was agreed that deliberately providing information of the whereabouts of the keys was an offence. It was “reasonably practicable” for Mr Farrer not to tell his mother where the keys were kept in this case.18.18 The Court of Appeal case of Ex Parte Farrer (2000) confirmed the proposition that, if other people who are not authorised to possess the firearm/shot gun have access to it, the firearm/shot gun will not have been stored securely to prevent access by unauthorised persons. The Court of Appeal found that the term “practicable” in the Firearms Rules means “feasible in practice” not socially convenient or “reasonable”. The court found that it was feasible for Mr Farrer to have prevented his mother having access, and that he was in breach of the conditions of the certificate because he gave his mother access to the key. What is required is for the certificate holder to keep the whereabouts of the key or security combination unknown to anyone but themselves.18.19 With regard to shared security, such as a firearm and a shot gun certificate holder sharing a cabinet, separate security provisions to prevent unauthorised access to firearms once within the cabinet or primary security measure should be made. Devices such as lockable high tensile steel cable are suitable for this purpose.18.20 Under most circumstances, it is preferable that firearms should be secured within the occupied part of the structure. Separate, detached buildings, or those attached but having only external access, including outhouses and garages, should not be used unless the levels of security meet the standards set out in the Firearms Security Handbook. If used, these should also be protected by an intruder alarm linked to the household to BS EN 50131.18.21 If the certificate holder’s dwelling is a mobile home or static caravan, a different set of security concepts should be adopted. Details can be found in the Firearms Security Handbook. These are primarily concerned with the anchorage of the structure. That structure’s capability to store items securely may require that an extra layer of security is needed to “target harden” the unit. It is unlikely that a gun room can be satisfactorily constructed within such a dwelling or unit of this type.18.22 As with any other valuable articles, the security of firearms should be considered in layers:(i) Perimeter - the protection of the surroundings etc which are necessary for particular situations or risks. Exterior lighting, approaches overlooked etc;160
Guide on Firearms Licensing Law(ii) Shell - the protection of the surrounding structure (the building or part of a building) which contains the immediate or core layer for the firearms;(iii) Interior - which secures the firearms directly.18.23 In most circumstances, the shell and interior layers are likely to be all that need to be addressed. However, conditions which affect either the ability of the outer structure to provide a defensive level commensurate with the particular risks, or any constraints upon the occupier, (for example crime level, property style or type of construction, constraints in tenanted property etc.) may require adjustments to either layer.18.24 If the occupant can show that the house has been designed and built to the requirements of BS8220 (the “Secured by Design” model, introduced in 1996) or has doors and windows to BS PAS 24 (2016) or the most up to date PAS standard, then those parts of the dwelling can be taken to have satisfactory security. The Secured by Design New Homes Guide is a source of reference. Other test standards for door and window sets exist such as LPS 1175 and STS 201.The broad levels of security18.25 It may be helpful to think of security in terms of broad “levels” to be applied according to the circumstances of each case. These are not intended to be prescriptive, but rather to provide guidance on what might be considered proportionate in each case. Level 1 (below) would be considered the normal standard of security applicable to the majority of cases.Level 118.26 A gun cabinet, or (where only one rifle or shot gun is held and a low level of risk is involved) a gun clamp or similar device fixed to the building is normally considered to be reasonable security. This should be located to frustrate or obstruct points of attack and identification by casual visitors to the premises. Other considerations might be:ï Final exit doors of good construction, ideally PAS24 and secured with locks to the appropriate British Standard.ï Suitable locks/securing devices on ground floor windows and French/patio windows.18.27 As an additional level of security, ammunition and easily removable component parts – such as rifle bolts etc. – should be stored separately from the firearms they fit, if it is safe and reasonable to do so and they may not been confused between firearms. This could be either by use of a detached storage container fitted elsewhere in the dwelling, or one built into or onto the firearms cabinet.18.28 There is a need to consider other alternatives for unusual firearms such as punt guns, cannon etc. In these cases, such items may be secured in buildings other than the dwelling. Suitable securing points may be required where the situation or construction of such buildings make it necessary. Where possible any removable part that would render the gun inoperative should be stored separately.161
Guide on Firearms Licensing Law18.29 When only one rifle or shot gun is held and a lower level of risk is involved, gun clamps or similar devices or arrangements may be adequate. Other considerations in that dwelling might be:a) Final exit doors of good construction secured with good quality locks and/or other types of deadlocking facilities;b) Suitable locks/securing devices on ground floor windows and French/patio windows.18.30 In more modern houses, the above requirements will be met in properties with PVCu doors or specialist doors with a multi-locking system which is secured by a deadlock. These requirements will also be met in properties with PVCu or specialist windows by a similar style of system secured by a keyed lock, either handle or independently mounted.18.31 When providing advice to fit locks to PVCu doors and/or windows it must be stressed that the manufacturer/supplier should be consulted about which locks would be appropriate, as the fitting of non specified locks may cause damage to the article and invalidate the product warranty.Level 218.32 Where the individual circumstances are such that additional security might be required due to factors such as repeat victimisation, a high crime location, building regularly unoccupied, substantial number of firearms on the premises, in addition to the provision of a suitable cabinet, gun room or safe, the following may be considered:a) The final exit door locks should be to BS3621 or equivalent and any French doors/ patio windows should have an integral locking system or be provided with supplementary locks to frustrate forcible opening, together with anti-lift blocks if applicable. These requirements will usually be met in properties with UPVC doors or specialist doors with a multi- locking system secured by deadlock.b) Windows on the ground floor and those accessible from flat roofs etc should be fitted with an appropriate type and number of locks which are self-latching or key operated. These should have casement-to-frame locking along the opening edge;c) An audible intruder alarm to the appropriate standard protecting either the whole the premises or those parts of the premises where guns are stored.18.33 The latest Secured by Design New homes guide provides guidance on Home Security for new and refurbished properties and is considered to be the Police Preferred specification for home builders.18.34 In the case of outbuildings or garages where the main building is not alarmed, consideration should be given for a stand-alone monitored alarm.162
Guide on Firearms Licensing Law18.35 For these purposes, a “substantial” number of firearms should be considered with regard to the type of firearms, their potential danger if misused and their likely attractiveness to criminals – for example, forces may wish to exclude muzzle- loading shot guns and muzzle-loading rifles given they rarely feature in criminal use. At the lower end the number might vary between 6 and 10, depending on the type of firearm concerned, whilst anything over 10 would rarely be lower than level2. It must be stressed, however, that it is not enough to base an assessment on the number of firearms alone - all factors mentioned above should be taken into account. Sound moderators, spare barrels, spare cylinders and component parts should not be considered as part of this total.18.36 A different form of security which equates to that above (such as providing a reinforced gun room or other area), may also be suitable. Advice should be sought from Firearms Licencing.Level 318.37 If the risk is assessed as being greater than the previous level (for example by virtue of a higher crime rate, certain high profile certificate holders, a larger number of firearms held or any other factors which substantially increase the risk of burglary), then the following should be considered as well as the previous level of security:a) Dividing the risk, for example by the provision of separate cabinets, perhaps in different locations within the premises, to reduce the number of firearms per enclosure;b) Additional target hardening of the storage (cabinet with individual gun locks, or extending to a gun room);c) Protected by an intruder alarm to BS4737 3.30:2015 or equivalent and ideally monitored by a NSI monitoring centre with an appropriate response.18.38 For these purposes, a “larger” number of firearms may be taken as meaning more than twelve guns (again being cognisant as to whether to include the likes of muzzle-loading firearms). As with level 2, it is not sufficient to base an assessment on the number of firearms alone; all other factors mentioned above are equally important, and regard must also be had to the type of firearms, their potential danger if misused and their likely attractiveness to criminals. Again, sound moderators, spare barrels, spare cylinders and component parts should not be considered as part of the total.Ammunition18.39 Ammunition for section 1 firearms must be kept secure. As a matter of best practice, it should be stored in its own individual secure storage – eg, an integral, lockable compartment within a gun cabinet. Although secure storage of shot gun cartridges is not a requirement of the Firearms Acts, it is sensible to recommend that they should be locked away for both security and safety, especially where there are children in the house.163
Guide on Firearms Licensing Law18.40 Although ammunition is not a serious fire hazard, it is advisable that ammunition containers are not in an area exposed to a risk of fire, nor should they be in the area of an escape route where there is a fire risk. If there is any doubt on the safety or method of intended storage, the Explosives Liaison Officer may be consulted. This is also recommended in the case where a private certificate holder intends to keep reloading articles such as gunpowder, primers or large quantities of cartridges etc.Section 5 firearms and other articles requiring section 5 authority18.41 Where any section 5 firearm is held in a dwelling, the provisions of Level 3 security should be applied. The alarm system should include personal attack facilities for the safety of the occupants to BS EN 50131 and protected by an intruder alarm to BS4737 3.30:2015 or equivalent and ideally monitored by a NSI monitoring centre with an appropriate response.Safe-keeping of keys18.42 Only authorised persons should have access to any of the keys for any cabinet etc containing firearms and section 1 ammunition. Care needs to be taken in selecting locations for the storage of keys, particularly any spare sets, to avoid them being discovered and improperly used. Consideration could be given to using a key cabinet or secure storage (safe) to store keys and spare keys. In all cases primary and spare should be stored separately.Siting and fixing of devices18.43 Any firearm security cabinet etc. should be sited out of view both inside and outside the building. Securing to suitable building walls within built-in furnishings, that is wardrobes, cupboards, or lockers can prove effective. Rooms such as lofts and cellars that are unlikely to be visited by casual visitors are options. However, when recommending such places, it is important to consider whether the environment is suitable. Extremes in temperature, dampness or condensation may cause damage to valuable firearms. Particularly damp conditions may also cause corrosion of the fixings or the cabinet material, thus reducing its security.18.44 In addition, the ease and convenience of access to such places is important. If this is difficult there may be a tendency for the certificate holder to delay putting their firearms away upon return to the dwelling. Police research has shown that a number of losses have involved owners not immediately securing their weapons and suffering their subsequent theft.18.45 In advising on the location of any security cabinet, it is worth noting that most steel gun cabinets have a high weight-to-footprint ratio. The average floor loading for a suspended floor on timber joists is 56lbs per square foot. A 9-gun cabinet with a 24" x 12" (608 x 304 mm) footprint can be in the order of 126 lbs per square foot which equates to more than a safe average suspended floor loading. Any fixing to a wall will reduce this loading. Joist ends are a more suitable fixing location than joist runs, though care must be taken to avoid weakening the joists when fixing to them.164
Guide on Firearms Licensing Law18.46 In a loft installation for a cabinet, care needs to be exercised. Not all lofts have joists calculated to include weight loading other than that of the ceiling below. It is not uncommon for joists in lofts to be 40% smaller in cross sections than joists carrying floors. Full use must therefore be made of the support from structural walls carrying such joists. If there is any doubt, the applicant/certificate holder should obtain professional structural advice.18.47 Fixings for security devices form an important part of the overall resistance to attack. Fastening to timber studded walls should be avoided, unless some additional anchorage can be provided. Floor or roof joists (subject to the previous comments) are acceptable. Walls of brick, concrete or masonry are usually the best bonding materials. It is important that the fixing chosen is correct for that material (for example expanding bolts, chemical anchors, toggle bolts etc). With modern building materials, particularly breeze and thermal block walls, the materials are not particularly suited to normal fixing devices.18.48 When security devices are being fitted, consideration should be given to varying the method of fixing. For example, in buildings with only partition internal walls and modern insulation block lining or random stone walls, it can be acceptable to fix cabinets horizontally, as long as appropriate fixing devices are used.18.49 This will also assist when fastening into suspended wooden flooring, as it distributes the load more evenly. In this case, coach screws of at least 3/8" (8 mm) diameter and not less than 2.5" (63 mm) long will normally provide a suitable anchorage. Such fixings must be made into joists and not simply to the floor boarding.18.50 Another consideration should be the size and weight of the larger form of gun cabinet or commercial safe. Due to their weight or size, fixing may be unnecessary in these cases, but they should be located in such a position that would further frustrate removal.Consideration for certificate holders transporting firearms in vehicles18.51 When carrying firearms in a vehicle, the following steps are considered to accord with the duty to ensure the safe custody of the items.18.52 Whenever possible, the vehicle should not be left unattended for long periods. Vehicles containing firearms and left unattended for any length of time should ideally have an immobiliser and/or alarm fitted. For commercial vehicles, such as vans additional locking solutions should be fitted to manufacturer’s standards. Trackers should be considered by those individuals who regularly move large numbers of guns.18.53 Where possible, they should be parked in an area that provides natural surveillance18.54 For preference, the firearms should be stored in the locked boot or other secured load carrying area of the vehicle. They should be out of sight from passers-by.18.55 In the case of estates, hatchbacks and similar vehicles, the certificate holder should ensure that:165
Guide on Firearms Licensing Lawa) where fitted, the lid or cover of the load carrying area should be in place, or the firearms are covered and concealed to prevent their identification;b) if the vehicle is to be left unattended for any length of time, the firearm and ammunition should not be stored together;c) where the boot or load carrying area is the most practical place, ammunition should be secured in an appropriate container ideally, but not necessarily, secured to the vehicle;d) where it is practical, the bolt, magazine or other operating part should be separated from the firearm and either carried on the person, or kept in a locked container, ideally secured to the vehicle, or concealed elsewhere.18.56 Where firearms and ammunition are being carried on a journey which involves their being kept away from their usual secure storage, the certificate holder should make arrangements to ensure that they are, so far as is possible, secure. Considerations when firearms are being taken to venues involving overnight or longer accommodation include:a) obtaining accommodation that already provides secure facilities;b) separating and retaining possession of integral parts of the firearm – eg, the fore-end of a shot gun, bolt of a rifle etc;c) utilising portable security devices – ie, security cords etc.166
Chapter 19: Fees
Guide on Firearms Licensing Law
19.1 This chapter sets out the legal authority for charging fees for certificates and other authorisations issued under the Firearms Acts and sets out the exemptions.Legal authority19.2 There are two distinct types of fee set out in the Firearms Acts. These are:o Under section 43 of the 1968 Act, the Secretary of State has a power to vary the level of fees payable under the Act for licensing applications administered by the police. These fees were last set in 2015 and are subject to change.o Under section 32ZA of the 1968 Act and section 15B of, and paragraph 3A of the Schedule to, the Firearms (Amendment) Act 1988, the Secretary of State has a power to set fees payable under the Act for licensing applications administered by the Home Office or Scottish Government. The Firearms (Fees) Regulations 2019 set out the fees for prohibited weapons applications, museum licences and shooting clubs. These fees were last set on 1 October 2019 and are subject to change.Fees for firearms certificates etc issued by the police19.3 The fees for the different types of certificates etc issued by the police are set out below. Generally, certificates for firearms and shot guns are valid for five years. Those for registered firearms dealers are valid for three years.ActivityTotal Fee (£)Grant of Firearm Certificate88Grant of a Shot gun Certificate79.50Renewal of Firearm Certificate62Renewal of a Shot gun Certificate49Registered Firearms Dealers - Grant or Renewal200Replacement of lost or stolen Firearm or Shot gun Certificate4Coterminous grant /renewal90 / 65Visitor permit (individual / group)20 / 100Registered Firearms Dealer Grant for Game Fair etc.13Variation (not like for like)20Exemption from fees for firearm certificatesVariations19.4 No fee is payable on variation:167
Guide on Firearms Licensing Lawa) if the total number of firearms to which the certificate relates is not increased;b) in respect of amended or variation of conditions;c) in respect of ammunition alone;d) when a firearm certificate is renewed at the same time; ore) where the two elements of a “one for one” variation take place at the same time; that is one firearm is exchanged for another at the same time.19.5 Where a certificate holder who has disposed of a firearm makes application for a variation upon disposing of the firearm this will not normally attract a fee. This is usually within the seven days allowed for advice of the disposal, although this time may vary between police forces and depend on circumstance. Timings should be checked with the relevant licensing department.Other exemptions from fees for firearm certificates19.6 Sections 32 and 35 of the 1968 Act state a fee is charged only upon “grant”, “renewal” or “replacement” of a certificate. Therefore, no fee is payable upon refusal.19.7 Section 32(3) of the 1968 Act also provides that no fee shall be payable on the grant, variation or renewal of a certificate if the chief officer of police is satisfied that the certificate relates solely to, and, in the case of a variation, will continue when varied to relate solely to;(a) a firearm or ammunition which the applicant requires as part of the equipment for a ship or hovercraft; or(b) a signalling apparatus (for example signal or ‘Very’ pistols) or ammunition which the applicant requires as part of the equipment of an aircraft or aerodrome; or(c) a slaughtering instrument or ammunition, which the applicant requires for the purpose of the slaughter of animals. The term “slaughtering instrument” means a firearm designed or adapted for this purpose, rather than simply a weapon possessed for the humane destruction of animals.19.8 In categories (a) and (b) a free certificate should, in general, be granted only to the owner or charterer of the ship, hovercraft, aircraft or aerodrome, the owner or charterer’s agent, or the master or other responsible officer in charge of the stores of the ship, hovercraft, aircraft or aerodrome. In the case of category (c), the persons to whom free certificates in respect of slaughtering instruments or ammunition may be granted will include master butchers, superintendents of abattoirs, farmers, smallholders and crofters who kill their own animals within the food chain. Note that vets are not exempt.19.9 Section 32(3A) of the 1968 Act, as amended by Article 5 of the Firearms (Variation of Fees) Order 1994, provides a further exemption from the requirement to pay a fee for signalling devices which, when assembled and ready to fire, are not more than eight inches long.19.10 Under Regulation 3 of the Firearms (Fees) Regulations 2019, a fee is payable to the Home Office or Scottish Government before a trophy of war authority is168
Guide on Firearms Licensing Lawgranted. Where a firearm certificate is subsequently granted, section 32(4) of the 1968 Act provides that a firearm certificate relating solely to a trophy of war shall be granted free of charge and subject to the condition that the applicant shall not use the firearm. An ordinary certificate may also be varied free of charge so as to cover a trophy of war if the variation is made subject to the condition that the weapon shall not be used.19.11 Section 54(2)(b) of the 1968 Act provides for the issue of a free firearm certificate or, as the case may be, shot gun certificate to a person in the armed services who satisfies the chief officer of police that they are required to purchase or acquire a firearm or ammunition for their own use in their capacity as such.19.12 The Diplomatic Privileges Act 1964 exempts diplomats and members of some international bodies from payment of the certificate fee (see the section titled ‘Representatives of Foreign States and Commonwealth countries’ in Chapter 10).Coterminous firearm and shot gun certificates19.13 A reduced fee is payable in the case of coterminous certificates, as per section 11(3) of the Firearms (Amendment) Act 1988.Variation to a firearm or shot gun certificate where a fee is charged19.14 In accordance with section 32(1)(c) of the 1968 Act, a fee is payable for a variation (other than when the certificate is being renewed at the same time) that increases the number of firearms to which the certificate relates.Dealer’s registration19.15 Section 35(2) of the 1968 Act provides an exemption from the requirement to pay a fee for registration as a firearms dealer when the applicant is transferring their business from another police force area where they are already registered. This is also the case when the transfer is merely the result of a change of local government or police force area boundaries.Home Office and Scottish Government firearms feesFees for a prohibited weapons authority, museum licence or shooting club approval19.16 Fees for these different types of firearms applications are as set out below. Generally, prohibited weapons authorities are valid for up to three years, museum licences for five years and shooting club approvals for six years.169
Guide on Firearms Licensing LawLicence typeFeeMuseum first time£200Museum renewal£200Museum variation A£110Museum variation C£36Club first time£444Club renewal£372Club variation A£300Club variation B£206Club variation C£36Dealer first time£796 (before discount)Dealer renewal£747 (before discount)Dealer variation A£425Dealer variation B£206Dealer variation C£36Carrier first time£569Carrier renewal£540Carrier variation A£361Carrier variation B£206Carrier variation C£36PMSC first time£616PMSC renewal£565PMSC variation A£361PMSC variation B£206PMSC variation C£49PMSC variation D£316New Guard£48Defence and Security Equipment International exhibitor£389Olympic shooter£206Trophy of War£20619.17 The fee levels for the different categories of variation applications relate to the degree of scrutiny required:Variation A: Significant Government scrutiny and a police visit will be required, for example new premises at which firearms will be stored or a significant new area of business.170
Guide on Firearms Licensing LawVariation B: Some Government scrutiny and a police check but no visit, for example a change to a person named on the authority, such as a named individual who is responsible for security.Variation C: Any other change – an administrative change, such as a change of name, which requires the re-issuing of the licence.Variation D: Applicable to PMSCs only – the authorising of new guards, which requires police checks. There is a charge for each new guard.Prohibited weapons authority19.18 Part 2 of The Firearms (Fees) Regulations 2019 sets out the fees payable to the Home Office or Scottish Government before a relevant section 5 authority, permitting the possession of prohibited weapons, is granted, varied or renewed. A ‘relevant section 5 authority’ includes an authority granted to: registered firearms dealers (RFDs), carriers, exhibitors, maritime security companies, trophy of war or competitive shooters. Further information about application types and the relevant applicable fee is contained in Part 2 of the 2019 Regulations.19.19 Dealers who make an application to the police to be an RFD as part of their section 5 application will be subject to a discount equal to the amount of their fee to the police to be registered as an RFD (currently £200). This will avoid double payment. As the dates for RFD and section 5 renewal are synchronised after grant, the discount will ordinarily apply to renewal applications. In cases where the applicant is already an RFD and applying for grant of a section 5 authority, they will not benefit from the discount.Target shooting clubs19.20 Part 3 of The Firearms (Fees) Regulations 2019 sets out the fees payable to the Home Office or Scottish Government before an approval under section 15 of the Firearms (Amendment) Act 1988 is granted, varied or renewed.19.21 No fee is payable in respect of a firearm certificate subsequently granted by the police to the responsible officer of any rifle or muzzle-loading pistol club or miniature rifle club approved by the Secretary of State or the Scottish Ministers, and relating to firearms and ammunition to be used solely for target shooting by members of the club. Nor is any fee payable in respect of the variation or renewal or such a certificate (section 32(2) of the 1968 Act).Museum firearms licence19.22 Part 4 of The Firearms (Fees) Regulations 2019 sets out the fees payable to the Home Office or Scottish Government before a licence under the Schedule to the Firearms (Amendment) Act 1988 (firearms and ammunition in museums) is granted, varied or renewed.19.23 Museums that possess a museum firearms licence are not subject to any fees in respect of applications for, or variations of, authorisations as dealers under section 5.171
Guide on Firearms Licensing LawChapter 20: Notices and Appeals20.1 This chapter provides information about:ï the circumstances that require chief officers of police, the Secretary of State or Scottish Ministers to provide notices to those including firearms or shot gun certificate holders, and registered firearms dealers; andï the process for appeals against police decisions.Notices20.2 Chief officers of police are required to give notice:(a) to the holder of a firearm certificate:ï when varying a condition in the certificate (section 29(1) of the 1968 Act); orï when the chief officer requires them to surrender their certificate under section 30D(1) of the 1968 Act – whereupon the chief officer of police may request in writing the holder surrender any firearms or ammunition in their possession; or the certificate is cancelled by a court (section 52(2)(b) of the 1968 Act).ï when (following all reasonable attempts to reunite firearms with their owner), the chief officer of police chooses a manner in which to dispose of a firearm or ammunition of the certificate holder under section 12(4) of the Firearms (Amendment) Act 1988. Every reasonable effort should be made to realise the best price for the firearm(s) and ammunition where possible (see also Chapter 10 under ‘revocations and cancellations’).(b) to the holder of a shot gun certificate:ï when requiring them to surrender their certificate when it has been revoked by the chief officer of police (section 30D(1) of the 1968 Act or cancelled by a court (section 52(2)(b) of the 1968 Act).(c) to a registered firearms dealer:ï who has failed by the date of expiry to surrender their certificate of registration, requiring them to comply with the statutory requirement (section 38(6) of the 1968 Act);ï of the intention to remove their name from the Register; orï when the name of the dealer is removed from the register, requiring them to surrender their certificate of registration and register of transactions. If the register is kept by means of a computer, a copy of the information comprised in that register should be in a visible and legible form (section 38(8) of the 1968 Act).172
Guide on Firearms Licensing Law20.3 The Secretary of State and the Scottish Ministers are required to give notice:(a) to the holder of the Secretary of State or Scottish Ministers’ authority under section 5(1) of the 1968 Act requiring them to deliver up their authority when it has been revoked (section 5(6) of the 1968 Act);(b) to the persons responsible for the management of a museum holding a museums firearms licence:ï when varying the conditions in the licence (paragraph 2(1)(a) of the Schedule to the 1988 Act);ï when extending or restricting the premises to which the licence applies (paragraph 2(1)(b) of the Schedule to the 1988 Act);ï when requiring them to surrender the licence when it has been revoked (paragraph 2(4) of the Schedule to the 1988 Act).20.4 Article 2 of the Electronic Communications Order (SI 2011/713) amends section 56 of the 1968 Act to reflect that any notice to be given under that Act to a person may be given by recorded delivery service or electronic means such as email or fax. Notices may also be, and frequently are, served personally by the police, or in the case of somebody serving a term of imprisonment, a Prison Officer. In the case of revocation or refusal to renew a certificate, personal service, whenever practicable, gives the person an opportunity to discuss the matter.Appeals20.5 Sections 28A, 29, 30A, 30B, 30C, 34, 36, 37 and 38 of the 1968 Act (as amended) and section 12(4) of the Firearms (Amendment) Act 1988 give rights of appeal against decisions of chief officers of police in connection with the grant, variation, renewal or revocation of firearm certificates, and the registration or removal from the register of firearms dealers. Under section 44 of the 1968 Act an appeal lies to the Crown Court in England and Wales, or to the Sheriff in Scotland, in accordance with Schedule 5 of the 1968 Act. There is a right of appeal against a decision to vary existing conditions in section 29, but not against the initial decision to impose conditions (Buckland v Cambridgeshire Constabulary).20.6 Under Schedule 5 of the 1968 Act an appellant must give notice of their appeal to the administrator of the Crown Court (or Sheriff, in Scotland)1 and to the chief officer of police concerned within 21 days after the date on which they received notice of the decision of the chief officer against which they wish to appeal. The chief officer might want to consider any further evidence or representations at any time leading up to the hearing of an appeal. The administrator of the Crown Court or Sheriff is then required to enter the appeal and give notice to the appellant and to the chief officer of the date, time and place fixed for the hearing. Paragraph 5 of the Schedule provides that the chief officer may appear and be heard at the hearing of the appeal. The Schedule also provides for abandonment of an appeal1 Schedule 5 Part III (Scotland) does not refer to a requirement to give notice of an appeal, the date, time and place of the hearing, or contain any provision about the abandonment of an appeal.173
Guide on Firearms Licensing Lawby notice in writing to the administrator of the Crown Court or Sheriff and the chief officer not less than two clear days before the hearing.20.7 Section 44 of the 1968 Act was amended by section 41 of the 1997 Act. This provided two points of clarification in respect of the appeal process:(a) that an appeal shall be determined on the merits (and not by way of review), (R v Acton Crown Court (ex parte Varney) 1984); and(b) that the Court or Sheriff hearing an appeal may consider any evidence or other matter, whether or not it was available when the decision of the chief officer was taken (Kavanagh v Devon and Cornwall Constabulary 1974).20.8 In practice, this means that the courts will consider the case afresh, including any matters that may have come to light since the chief officer of police’s decision was made. The chief officer should therefore consider any such matters which have arisen which might have a bearing on the case prior to the appeal.20.9 In dealing with an appeal, police forces may wish to take the advice of their legal department on matters of law. It should be noted that apart from the Statutory Guidance for Chief Officers of Police, other guidance issued by the Home Office/Scottish Government or the National Policing Lead for Firearms Licensing is non-statutory in nature, and therefore there is no express statutory obligation for the police or the public to have regard to it. However, such guidance will often reflect the existing case law and previous decisions by the courts, and forces should consider what precedents may have been established in similar cases.20.10 As a general rule, no order for costs should be made against the police where an applicant is successful on appeal, unless, as an exception to the general rule, the police’s decision was unreasonable, or the police have acted in bad faith, in which case costs can be awarded against the police in those limited cases. The main concern of the police should always be public protection. In these cases the following case law applies:ï Oldring v Chief Constable of Hampshire (2003) – Costs should only be awarded against the police where their decision was “Wednesbury unreasonable;” meaning so unreasonable that no reasonable decision maker could have arrived at it. The question of whether or not the police’s decision was reasonable should be judged on the basis of the material that was before the police at the time they made the decision.ï R (On the application of Chief Constable of Sussex) v Chichester Crown court (2003) – Provided the Chief Constable reasonably comes to the conclusion that there are grounds to revoke and can maintain that view before the court, there can be no injustice to the appellant in denying them the ability to recover their costs even though they have succeeded on appeal.20.11 Ultimately, the courts retain discretion over what to decide on the issue of costs, but the court will be bound to follow the applicable case law.20.12 Recognising the public interest that the tightest control is exercised over those who possess firearms, the following case set out that, as a rule, appeals should be heard by full-time circuit judges.174
Guide on Firearms Licensing Lawï Chief Constable of Essex v Campbell (2012) – [Firearms licensing appeals] must, in the view of this court, be heard by full-time circuit judges. It is simply not fair to ask a parttime judge, without the experience of a full-time judge, to decide such issues. It should therefore follow that it is only with the consent of the Presiding Judges of a Circuit that a Recorder should be permitted to hear any such appeal, given the overwhelming importance of the strictness of control over those who have the privilege of holding firearms.175
Guide on Firearms Licensing LawChapter 21: Criminal use of Firearms21.1 This chapter outlines the various criminal offences contained in the 1968 Act, and includes references to firearms offences under the Highways Act 1980 and the Violent Crime Reduction Act 2006.Conversion of weapons (section 4 of the 1968 Act)21.2 Section 4(1) of the 1968 Act makes it an offence to shorten the barrel of a shot gun to a length less than 24 inches. It is not an offence for a registered firearms dealer to shorten the barrel of a shot gun for the sole purpose of replacing a defective part of the barrel so as to produce a barrel not less than 24 inches in length. Section 4(3) makes it an offence for a person other than a registered firearms dealer to convert an imitation firearm into a firearm.21.3 A person who commits an offence under section 1 of this Act by possessing, purchasing or acquiring a shot gun with a barrel shortened to less than 24 inches or a converted imitation firearm without holding an appropriate firearm certificate shall be treated as committing the offence in an aggravated form.Possession of firearm with intent to endanger life (section 16 of the 1968 Act)21.4 Section 16 of the 1968 Act makes it an offence to possess a firearm or ammunition with intent to endanger life or to enable another person to endanger life. The maximum penalty for this is life imprisonment.21.5 Section 16A of the 1968 Act makes it an offence to possess a firearm or imitation firearm with intent to cause or to enable another person to cause, someone else to believe that unlawful violence will be used against them or another person. It provides for a maximum penalty of 10 years imprisonment or a fine, or both.Using a firearm or imitation to resist arrest (section 17 of the 1968 Act)21.6 Section 17(1) of the 1968 Act makes it an offence for a person to use a firearm or imitation firearm with intent to resist or prevent their arrest, or that of some other person. Section 17(2) makes it an offence to possess a firearm or an imitation firearm when committing, or being arrested for, one of the offences in Schedule 1 of the 1968 Act (in Scotland, Schedule 2), unless they can show that they possess it for a lawful object. It should be noted that section 17(3) of the 1968 Act has been repealed.21.7 Schedule 1 of the 1968 Act has been amended by Schedule 2 of the Theft Act 1968. Section 10 of the Theft Act 1968 creates the offence of aggravated burglary in respect of burglary with firearms. The Theft Act 1968 does not extend to Scotland.176
Guide on Firearms Licensing Law21.8 For the purposes of section 17 of the 1968 Act the definition of “firearm” in section 57(1) of the 1968 Act applies without paragraphs (b) and (c) of that subsection, and “imitation firearm” is construed accordingly. The definition of firearm for the purposes of section 10 of the Theft Act includes an air gun or air pistol.21.9 The Firearms Act 1982 Act extends the provisions of section 1 of the 1968 Act to firearms that have the appearance of being a firearm to which section 1 of the 1968 Act (firearms requiring a firearm certificate) applies, and it is so constructed or adapted as to be readily convertible into a firearm to which that section applies.Carrying a firearm or imitation with criminal intent (section 18 of the 1968 Act)21.10 Section 18(1) of the 1968 Act makes it an offence for a person to have with them a firearm or imitation firearm with intent to commit an indictable offence or to resist arrest or prevent the arrest of someone else while they have it with them.21.11 Section 18(3) provides that in Scotland, “indictable offence” means any offence specified in paragraphs 1-18 of Schedule 2 to the 1968 Act. It should be noted that the definition of “indictable offence” in section 57(4) of the 1968 Act was omitted by the Criminal Law Act 1977 schedule 13. The Interpretation Act 1978 states in Schedule 1 that, in relation to England and Wales, “indictable offence” means an offence which, if committed by an adult, is triable on indictment, whether it is exclusively so triable or triable either way.21.12 In order to prove an offence under section 18(1) of the 1968 Act, it is necessary to show that:a. the accused had a firearm or imitation firearm with them; andb. they intended to commit an indictable offence or to resist arrest or prevent the arrest of another, as the case may be.21.13 Section 18(2) of the 1968 Act provides that if (a) and (b) are proved, that shall be evidence of an intention to have the weapon with them at the time of committing the offence or of resisting or preventing the arrest which can be displaced by evidence to the contrary.21.14 Section 18 of the 1968 Act covers all types of firearms, including shot guns, air weapons and imitation firearms. It should be noted that an air weapon must be sufficiently powerful to be defined as a lethal barrelled weapon.Carrying firearms in a public place (section 19 of the 1968 Act)21.15 Section 19 of the 1968 Act makes it an offence to have in a public place without lawful authority or reasonable excuse (the proof of which lies on the accused) a loaded shot gun, an air weapon (whether loaded or not), any other firearm (whether loaded or not) together with ammunition suitable for use in that firearm, or an imitation firearm.21.16 Section 57(6) of the 1968 Act includes a definition of “loaded” in relation to shot guns and air weapons. An air weapon is to be treated as loaded if there is177
Guide on Firearms Licensing Lawammunition in the chamber or barrel or in any magazine or other device which is in such a position that the ammunition can be fed into the chamber or barrel by the manual or automatic operation of some part of the gun or weapon.21.17 The definition of a “public place” in section 57(4) of the 1968 Act is the same as that in section 1(4) of the Prevention of Crime Act 1953, specifically “any highway and any other premises or place to which at the material time the public have or are permitted to have access, whether on payment or otherwise”. For Scotland, the word “highway” in the definition of “public place” in section 57(4) has been deleted and replaced by “road (within the meaning of the Roads (Scotland) Act 1984)”.21.18 Members of an approved rifle or muzzle-loading pistol club who carry club firearms and ammunition for the purpose of club shoots at ranges away from their home club premises benefit from the provisions of section 15 of the Firearms (Amendment) Act 1988. People so doing might be encouraged to carry written authority from their club secretary or club official and a copy of the club certificate. Firearms removed from club premises for the purpose of participating in competitions should be returned, without delay, to the club storage after the competition, unless it is impracticable to do so.Trespassing with firearms (section 20 of the 1968 Act)21.19 Section 20 (1) of the 1968 Act makes it an offence for a person, while they have a firearm (including an air weapon) or imitation firearm with them, to enter or be in any building or part of a building as a trespasser, and without reasonable excuse (the proof of which lies with them). Sections 20(2) and 20(3) extend this offence to include any land and land covered with water.21.20 Reasonable excuse is a defence, if it can be proved, but no exception is made for “lawful authority” since lawful authority itself would be incompatible with trespass. It is immaterial whether or not the firearm is loaded, or whether or not the accused have ammunition with them.Possession of firearms by persons previously convicted of crime (section 21 of the 1968 Act)21.21 A person who has been sentenced to custody for life or to preventive detention, or to imprisonment or to corrective training for a term of three years or more, or to youth custody or detention in a young offenders institution, shall not at any time have a firearm or ammunition in his possession. This includes an antique firearm, an air gun or ammunition for it.21.22 A person who has been sentenced to imprisonment for a term of three months or more but less than three years, or to youth custody or detention in a young offenders institution for such a term or who has been subject to a secure training order or a detention and training order, shall not at any time before the expiration of the period of five years from the date of his release have a firearm or ammunition in his possession.21.23 In the case of a sentence with an order under section 47(1) of the Criminal Law Act 1977 (partly in prison and partly suspended) “the date of his release” means the date on which the period in prison specified in the order is completed.178
Guide on Firearms Licensing Law21.24 In the case of a person subject to a secure training order “the date of his release” means the date in which he is released from detention under the order, or the date halfway through the total period specified in the order, whichever is the later.21.25 In the case of a person subject to a detention and training order “the date of his release” means the date on which he is released from detention ordered under section 104 of the Powers of Criminal Courts (Sentencing) Act 2000, or the date in which he is released on licence following recall from prison as specified in the order, or the date of the half-way point of the term of the order, whichever is the later.21.26 It should be noted that the wording of section 21(2B) was repealed by the Legal Aid, Sentencing and Punishment of Offenders Act 2012 from 3 December 2012.21.27 A person who is subject to a recognizance to keep the peace or to be of good behaviour, or a community order within the meaning of Part 12 of the Criminal Justice Act 2003 made in England or Wales, or a caution in Scotland, containing a requirement that he shall not possess, use or carry a firearm, shall not at any time during which he holds the licence or is so specified by the order, have a firearm or ammunition in his possession.21.28 It is an offence for a person to sell or transfer, or to repair, test, or prove, a firearm or ammunition for a person whom he knows or has reasonable ground for believing to be prohibited by this section to have a firearm or ammunition in his possession.21.29 A person prohibited under this section from having in his possession a firearm or ammunition may apply to the Crown Court or, in Scotland, to the sheriff, for a removal of the prohibition, and if the application is granted that prohibition shall not then apply to him.Firing an air weapon beyond premises (section 21A of the 1968 Act)21.30 Section 21 A of the 1968 Act, as inserted by section 34 of the Violent Crime Reduction Act, makes it an offence for a person of any age who has an air weapon on any premises to fire a missile beyond those premises. It is a defence for a person to show that the premises into or across which the missile was fired were premises the occupier of which had consented to the firing of the missile (whether specifically or by way of general consent).Highways Act 198021.31 Under section 161 of the Highways Act 1980, it is an offence for any person, without lawful authority or excuse, to discharge any firearm within fifty feet of the centre of any highway, if in consequence any user of the highway is injured, interrupted or endangered. For these purposes a carriageway means a highway (other than a cycle track) over which the public have a right of way for the passage of vehicles.21.32 The Highways Act does not apply in Scotland but Procurators Fiscal may use common law offences of “culpable and reckless conduct” and “reckless179
Guide on Firearms Licensing Lawendangerment” in situations in which the 1980 Act would be contravened in England and Wales.180
Guide on Firearms Licensing LawChapter 22: Law Enforcement22.1 This chapter provides information about police powers to:ï search with a warrant;ï stop and search;ï require production of certificates; andï arrest.22.2 It goes on to set out some details of the time requirements for commencement of summary proceedings, and the powers of a court to order the cancellation of a certificate and/or the forfeiture of firearms or ammunition.Search with a warrant22.3 Section 46 of the 1968 Act provides that if a justice of the peace or a magistrate, or a sheriff in Scotland, is satisfied that there is reasonable ground for suspecting that an offence under the Act (except an offence under section 22(3) of the 1968 Act or an offence relating specifically to an air weapon) has been, is being, or is about to be committed, or that, in connection with a firearm or ammunition, there is a danger to the public safety or to the peace, they may grant a search warrant authorising a constable or civilian officer:(a) to enter at any time premises or a place named in the warrant, if necessary by force, to search the premises or place and every person found there;(b) to seize and detain anything found on premises or a place, or on any person there, which they suspect of being connected with an offence, or a possible offence under the Act (other than an offence under section 22(3) of the 1968 Act or connected with air weapons) or, in connection with a firearm, imitation firearm or ammunition, there is a danger to the public safety or to the peace.22.4 The power to seize and detain under section 46 of the 1968 Act includes a power to require information stored in any electronic form, which is accessible from the premises or place in question, to be produced in a legible and visible form which can be taken away.Stop and search22.5 Section 47 of the 1968 Act gives the police various powers in connection with offences and suspected offences in a public place, or elsewhere, under sections 18(1) and (2) and 20 of the 1968 Act. A constable having reasonable cause to suspect a person of having a firearm, with or without ammunition, with them in a public place, or to be committing or about to commit, elsewhere than in a public place, offences under sections 18(1) and (2) and 20 may require the firearms or ammunition to be handed over for examination, search that person and detain them for the purpose of doing so, and, if a vehicle is involved, search the vehicle181
Guide on Firearms Licensing Lawand for that purpose require the person driving or in control of it to stop it. For the purpose of exercising these powers a constable may enter any place.22.6 The primary purpose of section 47(1) of the 1968 Act is to enable a constable to require the handing over of a firearm and any ammunition for their examination so that they may ascertain, for instance, whether a firearm is real or an imitation, what type of firearm it is (if this is not apparent), whether it is loaded or whether the ammunition is suitable for use in the firearm. It is, for example, an offence under section 19 of the 1968 Act, as amended by section 37(1) of the Anti-social Behaviour Act 2003, to have with you in a public place, without lawful authority or reasonable excuse:i) a loaded shot gun,ii) an air weapon (whether loaded or not),iii) any other firearm (whether loaded or not) together with ammunition suitable for use in that firearm, oriv) an imitation firearm in a public place.22.7 Thus if a constable sees a person with such a gun in a public place, although they have obvious grounds for suspecting them of having a firearm, they may well have no grounds for suspecting an offence until they have exercised the powers given by section 47(1) of the 1968 Act and examined the firearm. If the person refuses to hand over a firearm or ammunition when required to do so, they commit an offence and a power of arrest arises, as explained below.22.8 The powers to detain, search and enter in section 47 of the 1968 Act are similarly intended to enable a police officer to determine whether an offence has been committed and to take immediate and effective action. Section 47 also confers the power to require the person in question to hand over any firearms or ammunition for examination. The powers are, however, limited to the offences under the Act which are listed above, and any officer using them may have to satisfy a court as to the grounds upon which they were exercised. Chief officers of police should keep careful watch on the use of these powers and satisfy themselves that they are used properly and with discretion.Require production of Certificates22.9 Section 48 of the 1968 Act provides that a constable may demand from any person believed to be in possession of a firearm or ammunition to which section 1 of the 1968 Act applies, or of a shot gun the production of their firearm certificate, or, in the case of a shot gun, their shot gun certificate.22.10 Section 48(2) of the 1968 Act provides a constable the power to seize weapons and ammunition in cases of non-compliance, the constable may also require the person to immediately declare his full name and address.182
Arrest
Guide on Firearms Licensing Law
22.11 Section 24 of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 applies to England and Wales with regards to arrest without warrant powers for constables. In England and Wales a constable may arrest anyone without warrant who is, or he suspects is, about to, or in the act of, committing an offence. In Scotland, section 1 of the Criminal Justice (Scotland) Act 2016 provides a general power of arrest without warrant.22.12 If an offence has been committed the constable may arrest anyone without a warrant who is either guilty or whom he has reasonable grounds for suspecting them to be guilty.22.13 The constable in question must have reasonable grounds for believing it is necessary to arrest the person in question. The reasons are:(a) to enable the name or address of the person in question to be ascertained(b) to prevent the person in question—(i) causing physical injury to himself or any other person;(ii) suffering physical injury;(iii) causing loss of or damage to property;(iv) committing an offence against public decency;(v) causing an unlawful obstruction of the highway;(c) to protect a child or other vulnerable person from the person in question;(d) to allow the prompt and effective investigation of the offence or of the conduct of the person in question;(e) to prevent any prosecution for the offence from being hindered by the disappearance of the person in question.Time for commencing summary proceedings22.14 Section 51(4) of the 1968 Act provides that, notwithstanding section 127 of the Magistrates Courts Act 1980 or section 23 of the Summary Jurisdiction (Scotland) Act 1954, summary proceedings for any offence under the Act (except section 22(3) of the 1968 Act, or any offence relating specifically to air weapons) may be instituted at any time within four years after the commission of the offence.22.15 It should be noted though that no proceedings shall be instituted in England and Wales six months after the date of the offence, unless they are instituted by, or under the direction of, the Director of Public Prosecutions. Such cases requiring the consent of the Director of Public Prosecutions should be referred to the local Crown Prosecution Service Office (under section 1(6) of the Prosecution of Offences Act 1985 a Crown Prosecutor has all the same powers of the Director as183
Guide on Firearms Licensing Lawto the institution of proceedings). The provision will be found useful in cases in which offences under the Act of a comparatively serious nature do not come to light until some time afterwards, for example, at the time that a firearm certificate falls due for renewal.Forfeiture and disposal of firearms and cancellation of certificates by a convicting Court22.16 Section 52 of the 1968 Act sets out the circumstances in which, on conviction, a court may order the forfeiture and disposal of firearms and ammunition and cancel firearm or shot gun certificates. Power is given to a constable to seize and detain any firearm or ammunition that may be the subject of an order for forfeiture. In the event of a cancellation of a certificate, the court must notify the chief officer of police who granted the certificate. The chief officer must then, by notice in writing, require the holder to surrender the certificate, and the holder must surrender the certificate within 21 days. No order can be made on the conviction of a person for an offence under the schedule of the Firearms (Amendment) Act 1988 concerning museum licences for the forfeiture of any firearm and ammunition in their possession in their capacity as a museum employee (section 25(5) of the 1988 Act).Counting Rules for Recorded Crime22.17 Where the offences of possessing etc firearms or ammunition, or shot guns, without a certificate are committed, often when a certificate expires and has not been renewed, a crime report must be completed:(a) the day following the expiry of the certificate; or(b) when the offence is substantiated, that is when the certificate holder is visited by the Enquiry Officer to carry out routine renewal enquiries and it is established that the applicant was in unlawful possession of the firearms and/or ammunition after the expiry date. This option is considered the most appropriate.184
Guide on Firearms Licensing LawChapter 23: Proof of Firearms23.1 Proof is the compulsory testing of every firearm to ensure its safety before it is first offered for sale. It includes all explosive operated small arms, whether for present use or future invention adapted for the discharge of shot, bullet or other projectile. It includes pistols, revolvers, shot guns, rifles, cattle killers, line throwers, signal pistols, alarm guns and nail driving and other industrial tools. Air weapons are not included. Firearm barrels adapted to discharge a ball of a greater weight than one pound and three quarters, or a barrel of a bore exceeding 2 inches, are not included. Reproof is the similar testing of a firearm that may have fallen below standard because of alteration. This is a complex area and chief officers of police will want to consider seeking guidance from qualified gunsmiths or the proof houses mentioned below when dealing with issues around proof. The proof houses can also carry out safety tests on items not subject to statutory proof, such as cannon barrels.23.2 There are two proof houses:Birmingham Proof House Banbury Street BirminghamB5 5RHLondon Proof House 48 Commercial Road LondonE1 1LPFor any queries relating to proof, please contact the proof authorities directly.23.3 The proving of firearms is governed by the Gun Barrel Proof Acts of 1868, 1950 and 1978 (However, note that much of the 1950 Act was repealed in 1996 by SI 1996/1576).Under these Acts it is:(a) an offence to sell, exchange, expose or keep for sale, or export, or keep for exportation, or to attempt to sell, exchange or export, or to pawn or pledge, or attempt to pawn or pledge, or to take in pawn or pledge, an arm, the barrels of which are not duly proved and marked as proved (section 108 and 109 of the 1868 Act);(b) an offence to import into the United Kingdom small arms, the barrels of which are not duly proved and marked as proved, without giving notice in writing within seven days to either the London or Birmingham Proof House or to send such imported arms, within twenty-eight days of their arrival in the United Kingdom, to be proved at either the London or Birmingham Proof House (Section 122 of the 1868 Act).185
Guide on Firearms Licensing LawThis does not apply to any small arm imported by any person for their own personal use whilst it is in their possession. In such a case, the proof is the responsibility of the possessor.23.4 For each offence committed, every person shall be liable on summary conviction to a fine, and on conviction on indictment to a fine (see Section 122 of the 1868 Act). If it should come to notice that firearms which do not bear recognised proof marks are being dealt with in any way, the fact should be communicated to the Proof Master at one of the addresses above.23.5 It should be noted that the word “barrel”, as defined in Section 4 of the 1868 Act, includes the breech or any part of the arm in, from or through which all or any part of the charge would be fired. Illustrations of all the proof marks that are at present recognised in the United Kingdom may be obtained from either of the proof houses listed above. They can also provide a small booklet (“Notes on the proof of shot guns and other small arms”), at a nominal cost. This covers the law and procedure of proof, and provides examples of a broad range of proof marks.23.6 Section 129 of the 1868 Act (convention proof marks) provides for the registration at the Proof Houses of Birmingham and London of the proof marks of a foreign state which has a public proof house established by law and recognised by the Permanent International Commission for the Proof of Small Arms (CIP).23.7 Section 130 of the 1868 Act also provides that barrels bearing duly registered proof marks of a foreign state shall be exempt from the liability to prove. If the barrel is altered by any means except user wear and tear so that it no longer represents the proof to which it would be subject in the official proof house of the state in question, it shall cease to be exempt.186
Guide on Firearms Licensing LawChapter 24: Surrender and disposal of firearms and ammunition24.1 This chapter offers definitions of both surrender and disposal, and provides general advice to police forces on how to deal with firearms and ammunition that are handed over to them. It then goes on to look at how to handle the receipt of antiques and firearms of particular historic interest.Definitions24.2 No obstacle should be placed in the way of a person who wants to surrender firearms or ammunition to the police. Surrender might suggest illegal possession although this may not always be the case. Persons anxious to dispose of firearms and ammunition should be allowed to hand them in at a police station. Disposal might suggest unwanted/unusable firearms held on certificate although it is lawful to dispose of these through a registered firearms dealer (RFD) and owners should be encouraged to take this course to save police resources and realise the value of their items, particularly if they are of an historic or heritage nature. Firearms should either be disposed of through the police, or to a RFD. Following the establishment of the National Ballistics Intelligence Service (NaBIS), police should ensure that recovered firearms and other ballistic items are assessed against the NaBIS submission criteria and submitted to one of the NaBIS hubs in London, Manchester, Birmingham, or Glasgow.General advice on receipt of firearms or ammunition24.3 Where any firearm is handed to the police, the first priority is to ensure that it is safe. At no time should the gun be pointed in a direction where it might cause death, injury or damage if it were to discharge. All firearms should be made safe by officers or staff qualified and experienced in the handling of firearms. Whatever the individual circumstances, a receipt should be given and the occurrence recorded as “voluntary surrender of firearms and/ or ammunition”. Subject to paragraph 24.6 below, a disclaimer should be signed if at all possible to facilitate lawful disposal.24.4 Undue pressure should not be used to force a potentially financially and historically valuable item to be destroyed and care should be taken to ensure that the wishes of the person handing over the items are fully understood (see paragraphs below). Where guns are taken into the care of the police but remain the property of a certificate or permit holder, it is important that they are so stored that no damage can be caused to them and they are not destroyed without the consent of the owner. In such case, accurate records must be kept with regard to their safe- keeping.24.5 Different considerations must necessarily apply to those cases when a person wishes to surrender a weapon in respect of which they do not have any lawful authority to possess. It is often the case that weapons may be held by people in ignorance of their illegality; they may be kept in homes where they have been overlooked or forgotten; or may have come into possession of their present owners187
Guide on Firearms Licensing Lawthrough the death of relatives. It should be borne in mind that the estate of a deceased person retains title to any surrendered firearms and they should be disposed of in accordance with the instructions of the estate. Unless expressly authorised they should not be destroyed by the police.24.6 Anyone surrendering an illegally held firearm should be questioned discreetly with a view to establishing its history but, unless circumstances exist to give serious cause for concern as to its provenance (for example, if it appears to have been stolen), the person handing it in should not be pressed. The emphasis should be on creating an environment in which people are encouraged to hand in illegally held firearms.24.7 Where it appears, for example, that a person who has inherited a firearm or shot gun wishes to retain it lawfully as a certificate holder or to arrange for its sale/auction, it would be appropriate to issue them with a permit under section 7 of the 1968 Act in order to legitimise their position (see Chapter 14). This is also the case where the person holding the firearm is the executor to the will of the deceased or where an application for a shot gun or firearm certificate is being made. In some cases once NABIS investigations have been completed the firearm/ammunition may be transferred to an RFD designated by the person surrendering the item(s).24.8 In any instance, however, when it is believed that a serious offence involving a surrendered gun has been committed, the surrender, find or recovery should be entered onto the NaBIS database and the requisite police procedures should be followed. Any decision to prosecute will be a matter for the discretion of the chief officer of police and the Crown Prosecution Service or Procurators Fiscal.Firearms surrendered by RFDs or auction houses24.9 Police forces are not obliged to accept firearms surrendered by registered firearms dealers who hold those firearms legally, in circumstances where the RFD has alternative available options for selling or disposing of the firearms. Firearms legislation does not expressly oblige the police to be responsible for disposing of firearms which are surrendered by RFDs or auction houses, nor does it oblige the police to cover the associated costs. In these circumstances, police force areas have discretion.Antiques24.10 If any firearm is handed in to which section 58(2) of the 1968 Act appears to apply (that is, it appears to be an antique), it should not be refused by the police, but the person wishing to dispose of it should be informed of its status as an antique under the firearms legislation and be allowed to keep it if they wish. Section 58(2) applies to antique firearms only when they are possessed etc as a curiosity or ornament. It will be open to that person to consider retaining the antique firearm or obtaining an estimate of its value and disposing of it possibly through the trade or to a museum or reputable collection. If any antique firearm is retained, the chief officer of police should offer it to a museum, for sale via auction or to a recognised collector organisation in order to ensure the preservation of historic assets which do not pose any threat to public safety.188
Firearms of particular interest
Guide on Firearms Licensing Law
24.11 Similarly, if a firearm is handed in by a firearm or shot gun certificate holder, which appears to be a historic asset or of particular interest and worthy of preservation, even though it is not an antique, it should be confirmed that the person wishing to dispose of it is aware of this possibility in case they wish to consider an alternative method of disposal. They may, for example, prefer to dispose of the firearm through a dealer, or agree to hand it over to a reputable collection. If the owner, having considered these alternatives, decides to hand it in to the police, the chief officer of police should consider offering the firearm to a museum or recognised collectors group. If it appears that a firearm may be of value, then the owner should be advised of this, and sufficient opportunity should be afforded to allow them to have the firearm properly valued and disposed of through a dealer (it may be appropriate to issue a section 7 permit in such circumstances).24.12 Occasionally, handguns covered by section 5(1)(aba) of the 1968 Act will turn up in deceased effects, possibly legally held under the exemptions provided by the 1997 Act. At other times they may have been illegally held. Either way, the police should immediately take the guns into their care, with legally held items being transferred to a section 5 registered firearms dealer or other authorised recipient. It should be borne in mind that the estate of a deceased person retains title to any surrendered firearms and they should be disposed of in accordance with the instructions of the estate. Unless expressly authorised they should not be destroyed by the police.24.13 Many museums, the Ministry of Defence, the providers of forensic science services and NaBIS have an interest in certain types of firearms, for example, for court demonstration purposes, and chief officers of police should co-operate, in cases where no owner exists or can be traced, by not destroying a firearm of an unusual type until the staff of these authorities have had an opportunity to examine it. They will make arrangements direct with police forces to inspect firearms and those of interest may be handed over to an official against receipt.24.14 Ammunition and its packaging may also be of interest to museums and collectors. It should therefore be inspected by independent experts from trade and museums in order to establish its heritage significance, interest and value. If it is of heritage significance, interest or value then it should be passed to museums or to the trade so that those entitled to the value can receive it.24.15 Other firearms related objects handed to the police e.g. loading equipment should also be independently assessed since they may have commercial value as well as being of historic interest. If this is apparent at the time of surrender then they should be handed back and the person surrendering the objects advised to take them to a suitable dealer. This would not apply to component parts which are subject to certification.24.16 All other firearms and ammunition not retained for police purposes should be recorded and destroyed. The destruction should be witnessed by more than one officer, and the records of destruction should be kept for a minimum of ten years.189
Guide on Firearms Licensing LawChapter 25: Northern Ireland25.1 Section 60(3) of the 1968 Act provides that the Act shall not extend to Northern Ireland, where the possession of firearms is subject to separate legislation (see the Firearms (Northern Ireland) Order 2004 (No. 702) (N.I.3)). This chapter provides some information about the differences and similarities between firearms controls in Northern Ireland and Great Britain. It also offers more detailed information about the movement of firearms and ammunition from England, Wales and Scotland to Northern Ireland.General25.2 In Northern Ireland, unlike in England and Wales, all firearms, including shot guns, air guns (except those with a kinetic energy of one joule or less, as stated in Schedule 1, paragraph 9 of the 2004 Order) and deactivated firearms (unless they are deactivated to the 1995 Home Office standard, as updated in 2010 – see paragraph 2.15) are subject to firearm certificate control and it is illegal for any person under the age of eighteen to be in possession of a firearm. In certain circumstances sixteen to eighteen year olds are permitted to possess stipulated types of firearms and ammunition for particular purposes. These particular provisions are stated within article 7 of the 2004 Order.25.3 The provisions of the Northern Ireland Protocol mean that Council Regulation (EU) 258/2012 and Council Directive (2021/555), and all other council directives, continue to apply in Northern Ireland.Firearm Certificates25.4 The definition of “firearm certificate” in section 57(4) of the 1968 Act specifically includes a firearm certificate granted in Northern Ireland. A firearm certificate issued in Northern Ireland is thus valid in Great Britain and, if the holder of such a certificate takes up residence in Great Britain, the certificate may be varied or revoked and the conditions subject to which it is held may be varied as if it were a certificate granted in Great Britain.25.5 Section 15 of the 1968 Act provides that a person holding a firearm certificate issued in Northern Ireland authorising them to possess a shot gun is exempt from the provision in section 2(1) of the 1968 Act which makes it an offence to possess, purchase or acquire a shot gun without a certificate.25.6 The period of validity of a firearm certificate issued in Northern Ireland is five years, the same as elsewhere in the United Kingdom. The proviso in section 28A(2) of the 1968 Act provides that, subject to the power of a chief officer of police in Great Britain to renew for a period of five years, a certificate granted in Northern Ireland shall not continue in force for a longer period than that for which it was so granted. On expiry the holder should apply for a certificate to be granted by the chief officer of police in the area where they reside.190
Registered firearms dealers
Guide on Firearms Licensing Law
25.7 The definition in section 57(4) of the 1968 Act of a registered firearms dealer also covers the holder of a firearms dealer’s certificate in Northern Ireland. The provisions as to firearms dealers in sections 3(1) to (5), 4(2) to (4), 8(1) and (2),and 45 of the 1968 Act and sections 6, 7(3), 13 and 18(2) to (5) of the Firearms (Amendment) Act 1988 apply to persons holding firearms dealers’ certificates in Northern Ireland. Section 34(1) of the 1968 Act prohibits the registration in Great Britain of a person who has been prohibited from being granted a certificate by order of a court in Northern Ireland. Article 2 of the Firearms (Northern Ireland) Order 2004 (NI 3) provides that, “holder of a firearms dealer's certificate" includes a person registered under section 33 of the Firearms Act 1968 (c. 27)”. Accordingly, a person registered as a dealer in Great Britain may trade in or with Northern Ireland.Sale, repair, test, proof, hire, gift or loan25.8 It should be noted that the prohibitions in section 3(2) and 3(3) of the 1968 Act apply to persons within the United Kingdom, and therefore include Northern Ireland. Section 35 of the 1997 Act with regard to sales etc. of firearms and ammunition not only applies to transactions with persons in Great Britain but also to transactions with persons in Northern Ireland. However, the additional requirements of sections 32, 33 and 34 of the 1997 Act, which specifically requires that transfers take place in person, are limited to Great Britain.Taking firearms from Great Britain to Northern Ireland25.9 The holder of either a firearm or shot gun certificate granted in England, Wales or Scotland may, subject to any applicable conditions, have in his possession in Northern Ireland the related firearm to which the certificate relates (see article 17 of the 2004 Order).25.10 A person who resides in Great Britain may, without holding a firearm certificate, have in his possession in Northern Ireland an air gun, with a kinetic energy in excess of one joule, provided he holds a certificate of approval from the Chief Constable (see article 18 of the 2004 Order). Certificate of Approval application forms are obtainable from the Chief Constable, Police Service of Northern Ireland, Firearms and Explosives Branch, Lisnasharragh, 42 Montgomery Road, Belfast BT6 9LD (028 9065 0222). Application for a Certificate of Approval must be made not less than one month before the proposed date of arrival in Northern Ireland. No fee is payable for a Certificate of Approval.25.11 The documents required and the procedures to be followed in cases of firearms (including air guns) taken into Northern Ireland by persons resident in Great Britain are set out in Appendix 8.25.12 The Firearms (Removal to Northern Ireland) (Revocation) Order 2003 (SI 2003/3228), which came into force on 1 January 2004, revoked the Firearms (Removal to Northern Ireland) Order 1990 (SI 1990/2621) and ended the system of prior approvals for section 1 firearms and ammunition.191
Guide on Firearms Licensing LawChapter 26: Visitors’ Permit Procedures26.1 This chapter sets out the legislative authority for the issue of visitors’ permits, and provides guidance to chief officers of police on the requirements that need to be met for an application to be successful. It also sets out the conditions that can be added to permits, how they might be varied and the controls on visitor shot gun permit holders buying shot guns.Legislative provisions26.2 Under section 17 of the Firearms (Amendment) Act 1988, visitors to Great Britain may, if they are granted the appropriate permit, have in their possession firearms, shot guns or ammunition without holding a certificate. Specifically, they may have:(a) a visitor’s firearm permit which allows them to have in their possession any firearm, and purchase, acquire or have in their possession any ammunition, to which section 1 of the 1968 Act applies;(b) a visitor’s shot gun permit which allows them to have in their possession, purchase or acquire shot guns (subject to the restrictions on purchase and acquisition of shot guns with a magazine (see paragraphs 26.21 to 26.25 below)). By virtue of section 5(2)(b) of the 1988 Act, they are exempt from the requirement to produce a shot gun certificate when purchasing ammunition.26.3 A visitors’ shot gun permit is valid for use throughout Great Britain for a period of up to 12 months, and a visitors’ firearm permit is also similarly valid subject to any territorial condition as to where the firearm may be used (a separate permit for each force area is not required in either case). While it is expected that the permit should only be valid for the duration of the particular visit, there might be circumstances where the police feel able to issue a pass for a longer period (and this need not be for the full 12 months). A decision will need to be taken to reflect the circumstances of each application, taking account of evidence of planned, future visits and the visitor’s history and character, perhaps on previous shooting trips to this country.Application26.4 Applications for a visitors’ firearm or shot gun permit will be made by a sponsor to the chief officer of police for the area in which the sponsor resides on the prescribed form of application (Form 107).26.5 The sponsor may be:(a) a private individual; or(b) the representative of, for example, a club, shooting syndicate, country estate or national shooting organisation.26.6 Where the sponsor is a private individual or represents a local shooting organisation, the usual checks should be made as to their bona fides in the same192
Guide on Firearms Licensing Lawway as for a certificate applicant. Although in most cases private sponsors will themselves be firearm or shot gun certificate holders, this need not necessarily be the case. Particular attention will need to be paid to security arrangements.26.7 Section 17(7) of the Firearms (Amendment) Act 1988 provides for a group application to be made for up to twenty permits for persons specified in the application. In addition to fulfilling the criteria outlined in paragraphs 26.9 and 26.10, the chief officer of police must be satisfied that the persons specified in such an application are genuinely part of a group who propose to use the firearms in question either for sporting purposes on the same private premises during the same period, or to participate in the same competition or event, or series of competitions or events. Where six or more permits are issued on the basis of a group application, a reduced fee is payable.Consideration of application26.8 The criteria for the grant of a visitors’ permit are set out in sections 17(2) and (3) of the Firearms (Amendment) Act 1988.26.9 Chief officers of police must not grant a permit to any person in respect of whom they have reason to believe:(a) that their possession of the weapons or ammunition in question would represent a danger to the public safety or to the peace; or(b) that they are prohibited by the 1968 Act from possessing them (for example, a person to whom section 21 of the 1968 Act applies). Convictions outside of the UK do not count towards this statutory prohibition but will be relevant to (a).26.10 If the grant of a permit is not precluded on the above grounds, chief officers of police must satisfy themselves that:(a) the applicant is visiting or intends to visit Great Britain; and either(b) in the case of a visitor’s firearm permit, the applicant has a good reason for having each firearm and the ammunition to which the permit relates in their possession, or, as respects ammunition, for purchasing or acquiring it, while they are a visitor to Great Britain; or(c) in the case of a visitor’s shot gun permit, that the applicant has a good reason for having each shot gun to which the permit relates in their possession, or for purchasing or acquiring it, while they are a visitor to Great Britain (and where the applicant wishes to purchase or acquire a shot gun with a magazine, that they satisfy the criteria listed at paragraphs 26.21 to 26.25 below). A shot gun with a magazine means a shot gun which has a non-detachable magazine incapable of holding more than two shots, in accordance with section 1(3)(a) of the 1968 Act (as amended).26.11 The information required to reach a decision on an application will be supplied by the sponsor, to whom all enquiries should be directed. Generally, it will be neither practicable nor appropriate to make detailed enquiries into a visitor’s fitness to hold a firearm. It will normally be sufficient to see a copy of any current firearm193
Guide on Firearms Licensing Lawcertificate, hunting licence or membership card of a shooting organisation issued to an applicant in their own country. Police forces may consider accepting a European Firearms Pass in support of applications from EU citizens. The verification by the sponsor of the event, if any, to be attended will normally enable the chief officer of police to be satisfied as to the applicant’s good reason.26.12 Applicants who wish to purchase a shot gun should similarly be able to provide a good reason for the purchase or acquisition of each gun, for example evidence of the event or events at which it is to be used. Application to purchase a shot gun should be made on the original application for a permit, using the space provided on the form. Applicants who wish to purchase a shot gun but who do not intend to use it in Great Britain should be directed to take advantage of section 18 of the Firearms (Amendment) Act 1988. This provision allows persons to purchase a firearm from a registered firearms dealer if that person has not been in Great Britain for more than 30 days in total in the preceding 12 months and the firearm is purchased for the purpose only of being exported without first coming into that person’s possession. If a person wishes to purchase a shot gun and take it with them from Great Britain they will need to obtain a visitor’s shot gun permit.Permit conditions26.13 Under section 17(4) of the Firearms (Amendment) Act 1988 the chief officer of police has the power to attach conditions to a visitors’ permit. Under section 17(5), the chief officer has the power to vary, by a notice in writing, any condition of the permit. However, there is no power to impose or vary a condition so as to restrict the premises where a shot gun may be used.26.14 In considering what sort of conditions should be attached, it is necessary to have regard to both the purpose and the proposed duration of the visit. Chief officers of police will want to consider the following:(a) It is recommended that all permits should contain conditions (i) to (v) set out in Appendix 9. However, it is important that all cases are considered on their merits with additional conditions added as appropriate (see below). A permit may be valid for up to 12 months, but the validity should normally relate to the duration of the proposed visit (but see paragraph 26.3);(b) Where an applicant for a visitor’s firearm permit is coming to shoot in a particular competition or event, the permit should normally make reference to the specific competition(s) or event(s) in respect of which it has been granted as in condition (vi). Where, however, the permit is sought for other sporting purposes such as deerstalking, game shooting or wild fowling, the type of condition will necessarily be dependent upon the locations specified by the sponsor in the application;(c) Where the permit is required for one or more specified locations (these may in some cases be in other force areas) condition (vii) in Appendix 9 would be appropriate;(d) Where the circumstances of the application merit a more open approach, condition (viii) should be imposed;194
Guide on Firearms Licensing Law(e) Where a visitor also wishes to purchase a shot gun or shot guns for shooting in Great Britain, condition (ix) should be imposed to require the permit holder to notify details of purchase to the police and to enter the details of each such shot gun in the appropriate part of the permit.26.15 A visitors’ firearm permit must specify the number and description of the firearms to which it relates, including their identification numbers, and give details of the quantities of ammunition authorised to be purchased or acquired, and to be held at any one time. A visitors’ shot gun permit must specify the number and description of the shot guns to which it relates, including, if known, their identification numbers. It should be established at time of application whether a sound moderator is to be included as an accessory to any firearm to be imported. If this is the case then all sound moderators should be specified on the permit.Variation of conditions26.16 Section 17(5) of the Firearms (Amendment) Act 1988 empowers the chief officer of police to vary the conditions attached to a permit. A request for variation, which must be made on a new application form, will most usually occur where a visitor has subsequently been invited to participate in some other competition or event. In such circumstances a variation may normally be granted on confirmation of the event to be attended, provided that there has been no material change in the applicant’s circumstances and that they still qualify under paragraphs 26.9 and26.10 above. If the event is to take place after the expiry date of the existing permit, it will be necessary for a fresh application for a new permit to be made.Processing late applications26.17 Applications should be made at least six weeks prior to arrival in the UK. Inevitably, some applications will be made close to the date on which the applicant wishes to come to this country, for example because of illness, a change in family or business circumstances or as a late addition or change to a group application. In such cases, while it cannot be guaranteed that all applications will be processed in time, every effort should be made to try and achieve this. Similarly, it may be necessary to issue amended permits at short notice to cater for unavoidable last-minute changes to guns (for example because of breakage) which visitors are authorised to bring with them (see also paragraph 26.16).Notification of refusal26.18 There is no right of appeal against a refusal to grant a visitors’ permit. Notification of refusal, giving the reasons for the decision, should be sent by letter to the sponsor. Where a refusal is issued it is particularly important that notification should be sent in good time, in order to avoid the applicant incurring unnecessary travel costs.195
Guide on Firearms Licensing LawDispatch of permits26.19 The completed permit should be sent to the sponsor who will forward it to the visitor in their country of origin for presentation to the Border Force on arrival in this country. The visitors’ permit will be accepted in lieu of an import licence issued by the Department for International Trade (DIT). A visitor must carry their permit with them on leaving the country for presentation to the Border Force at the point of departure. An export licence would only be required for onward destinations not covered by the firearms personal effects exception in the Export of Goods (Control) Order (EG(C)O), that is those countries subject to arms embargoes. In some cases, the permit will be valid for further visits.Diplomats and royal visitors26.20 Members of the Diplomatic Corps in London are not visitors and the normal considerations for the grant of a firearm or shot gun certificate apply (see also Chapter 10). Visiting diplomats and foreign dignitaries are, however, eligible for the grant of visitors’ permits subject to the normal requirements of section 17 of the Firearms (Amendment) Act 1988 being met.Controls on visitors’ permit holders buying shot guns in Great Britain26.21 Section 17(1A) of the 1988 Act contains restrictions on the purchase and acquisition of certain shot guns by the holder of a visitor’s shot gun permit. The restrictions only apply to transactions involving shot guns with a magazine. Single- shot shot guns are not subject to these restrictions. A single-shot shot gun means any shot gun which can fire only one shot from each barrel without reloading. Single-barrelled single-shot shot guns, double-barrelled shot guns and multi- barrelled shot guns which have no magazine fall within this definition.26.22 The purpose of this provision is to ensure that no visitor can purchase or acquire a shot gun with a magazine in Great Britain without holding a licence granted by DIT to remove the gun from Great Britain.26.23 A visitors’ shot gun permit shall not authorise the purchase or acquisition of a shot gun with a magazine unless one of the following requirements are met, namely that:(a) the permit holder has a licence issued by DIT to export the gun from Great Britain;(b) the gun will be exported from Great Britain; or(c) the terms of acquisition restrict the permit holder’s possession of the gun to the whole or part of their stay in Great Britain and prevent its removal from Great Britain.196
Guide on Firearms Licensing Law26.24 The onus is on permit holders to show vendors or transferors that they satisfy one of the above requirements. If none of the requirements are met, and the transaction takes place, permit holders will be committing an offence under section 2 of the 1968 Act and the vendors or transferors an offence under section 3(2) of that Act.26.25 Any transaction with a permit holder in respect of which sub-paragraph (a) or (b) above applies, must be notified to the chief officer of police who issued the visitors’ shot gun permit. The notice of transaction must be sent within 48 hours of the transaction by recorded or special delivery and must contain a description of the shot gun (including the identification number if any). It must also state the nature of the transaction (giving the permit holder’s name and address in their country of residence and the number and place of issue of their passport if any) and the particulars of any licence issued by DIT authorising the removal of the shot gun from Great Britain.197
Guide on Firearms Licensing LawChapter 27: Import and export of firearms and ammunition27.1 This chapter provides information about import and export licensing requirements for firearms and ammunition. The Department for International Trade (DIT) is responsible for these arrangements. Their contact details for enquiries are:ImportsImport Licensing Branch (ILB) DITemail: enquiries.ilb@trade.gov.uk Import controls - gov.uk (www.gov.uk)ExportsExport Control Joint Unit (ECJU) DITOld Admiralty Building WhitehallLondon SW1A 2BL Tel: 020 7215 4594email: exportcontrol.help@trade.gov.ukExport Control Joint Unit - gov.uk (www.gov.uk)Great Britain (GB) imports from the Rest of the World, and Northern Ireland (NI) imports from non-EU nations27.2 The following items are subject to DIT import licensing requirements:(i) lethal firearms, including any lethal barrelled weapon of any description from which any shot, bullet or other missile can be discharged and other weapons of whatever description designed or adapted for the discharge of any noxious liquid, gas or other thing;(ii) deactivated firearms, see paragraphs 27.19 to 27.21;(iii) component parts (other than wooden gun stocks) of any such firearms or other weapons and any accessory to any such firearm or other weapon designed or adapted to diminish the noise or flash caused by firing the weapon;(iv) ammunition including grenades, bombs, and other like missiles, and any ammunition containing or designed or adapted to contain any noxious liquid, gas or other thing;(v) any device (commonly known as a bump stock) which is designed or adapted so that: (i) it is capable of forming part of or being added to a self-loading lethal198
Guide on Firearms Licensing Lawbarrelled weapon (as defined in section 57(1B) and (2A) of the 1968 Act), and(ii) if it forms part of or is added to such a weapon, it increases the rate of fire of the weapon by using the recoil from the weapon to generate repeated pressure on the trigger.27.3 The above include firearms which are serviceable and those which are not, replica firearms capable of being fired or which can be readily converted so that they are capable of being fired, gas pistols, aerosol gas sprays and similar weapons.27.4 Normally, an import licence is not required to import the following but from time to time such goods may be subject to licensing control:(i) cartridges for smooth-bore guns containing five or more shot, none of which exceeds 0.36 inch (9 mm) in diameter;(ii) blank cartridges not exceeding one inch (25.4 mm) in diameter;(iii) air weapons or weapons powered by compressed carbon dioxide not declared to be “specially dangerous” under the Firearms (Dangerous Air Weapons) Rules 1969;(iv) ammunition for air guns, air rifles or air pistols;(v) articles manufactured in 1899 or earlier;(vi) any item not classified to chapters 93 or 97 of the HM Revenue and Customs Integrated Tariff, including vehicles, ships and aircraft incorporating a firearm.(vii) any component of ammunition.27.5 It should be noted that (iii) and (iv) are not exempt from licensing if imported into Northern Ireland. Moreover, although articles at (v) do not require an import licence, Section 58 of the Firearms Act 1968 and the Antique Firearms Regulations 2021 define whether a firearm should be regarded as “antique” for the purpose of firearms legislation.27.6 Commercial imports of firearms, component parts and ammunition require an individual import licence if manufactured on or after 31 December 1899. Applications for import licences should be made on the ICMS system.27.7 As a concession for personal non-commercial import of privately owned firearms, shot guns and ammunition the following documents are accepted by HM Border Force in lieu of import licences:(i) valid United Kingdom firearm or shot gun certificates;(ii) visitors’ firearm or shot gun permits.27.8 The firearms, shot guns or ammunition must be freely declared to Border Force upon importation. Firearms made on or after 1st January 1900 may only be imported with a DIT import licence or, for personal imports, a valid firearm or shot gun certificate or a visitors’ firearm or shot gun permit.199
Guide on Firearms Licensing Law27.9 The requirement for a DIT import licence for any firearm made on or after 1 January 1900, also applies to firearms that are considered to be antique, as defined by Section 58 of the Firearms Act 1968 and the Antique Firearms Regulations 2021.Any firearm made on or before 31 December 1899 is considered exempt from import controls and does not require an import licence to import it into the United Kingdom. There is, however, still a requirement for the holder to be in possession of a valid shot gun or firearm certificate in order to possess the firearm where the possession of such a certificate is necessary.27.10 Information on the importation of explosives can be obtained from DIT and from the Health and Safety Executive.Firearms Marking Requirements27.11 The UK’s Open General Import Licence (OGIL) sets out the UK’s firearms marking requirements. They apply to commercial and non-commercial imports.27.12 Firearms, including any relevant (essential) component parts (whether part of a firearm or not), imported into the UK must have markings which are clear, permanent and visible. Firearms and relevant component parts (barrel, frame, receiver (including upper and lower receivers), slide, cylinder, bolt or breech block manufactured on or after 1 January 1900 must be marked with:ï Name of manufacturer or brand;ï Country or place of manufacture;ï Serial number;ï Year of manufacture (if not part of the serial number); andï Model, where feasible.27.13 Ammunition packaging (not each bullet) must be marked with:ï name of manufacturer,ï batch number,ï calibre,ï type of ammunition.27.14 The font size to be used in the marking should be at least 1,6 mm. Where required, a smaller font size may be used for the marking of relevant component parts that are too small to be marked in compliance with the requirements set out in the OGIL.27.15 For frames or receivers made from a non-metallic material, the marking should be applied to a metal plate that is permanently embedded in the material of the frame or receiver in such a way that the plate cannot be easily or readily removed; and removing the plate would destroy a portion of the frame or receiver. Other techniques for marking such frames or receivers are permitted, provided that importers can demonstrate that those techniques ensure an equivalent level of clarity and permanence for the marking.200
Guide on Firearms Licensing Law27.16 The alphabet used on marked imported firearms or relevant component parts shall be Latin, Cyrillic or Greek and the numeral system used in the marking shall be Arabic or Roman.27.17 If a firearm is not marked as above, importers will have 28 days after import to comply with the marking requirement. If the item is being imported for deactivation, you have three months to either comply or have the item deactivated. Only the Latin alphabet and the Arabic numeral system can be used when marking in the UK. Failure to comply with the marking requirements is a customs offence. In the meantime, you are advised to mark using methods currently accepted by the UK Proof Houses.27.18 The following are exempt from the additional marking requirements set out in the OGIL:ï Firearms imported for the use of the UK military or police.ï Firearms of “historical” importance which in the UK will be all firearms manufactured before 1 September 1939 regardless of where imported from.ï Air weapons (that is to say, air guns, air rifles or air pistols including air weapons designed for use only when submerged in water and, in the case of Great Britain, air weapons powered by compressed carbon dioxide) and ammunition for air weapons.Deactivated Firearms27.19 An import licence is required for the import into the UK of a deactivated firearm. There is an exemption from the need for an import licence for deactivated firearms manufactured on or before 31 December 1899. An import licence will be required for each shipment. The only acceptable proof that a firearm is deactivated is a UK Deactivation Certificate. No other Deactivation Certificate will be accepted.27.20 Re-enactors will be able to apply for a three year import licence provided you have a UK Certificate of deactivation which confirms deactivation to current standards and are a member of a re-enactment society when you attend the overseas re- enactment event.27.21 Applications for deactivated firearms import licences can be made to DIT online. Guidance on registering and applying can be found on the front screen. If you are in any doubt or require further clarification on the need for an import licence, please email us at enquiries.ilb@trade.gov.uk.Northern Ireland Protocol27.22 The provisions of the Northern Ireland Protocol mean that Council Regulation (EU) 258/2012 and Council Directive (2021/555), and all other council directives, continue to apply in Northern Ireland.201
Guide on Firearms Licensing LawExports from Great Britain to the Rest of the World, and from Northern Ireland to non-EU countries27.23 Firearms, shot guns, component parts for firearms or shot guns, and ammunition are subject to export control and in general require a licence for export to any destination.27.24 Export licences are not usually required in the following circumstance. Holders of valid firearm or shot gun certificates or visitors’ firearm or shot gun permits may take abroad with them, or have sent, as part of their personal effects, without an export licence, any firearms, shot guns or related ammunition entered on the certificates if the certificates are presented by the holder, or their duly authorised agent, with the firearms and ammunition to the officer of the Border Force at the place of exportation. The exception also includes telescopic sights.27.25 From time to time this exemption will not apply to firearms consigned to certain destinations. Further details on the UK export control licensing system, including guidance on the export of firearms, may be obtained from the gov.uk website prior to export.27.26 Applications for export licences must be made to DIT via the SPIRE system and must be accompanied by the applicant’s firearm or shot gun certificate or, in the case of a registered firearms dealer, a copy of the dealer’s certificate or section 5 authority only if appropriate.202
Guide on Firearms Licensing LawChapter 28: Authorisation of armed guards on UK registered shipsPolicyï The policy to allow the use of armed guards applies only in exceptional circumstances:- to ships transiting the area at risk of attack by pirates within the High Risk Area (HRA) which is bounded: in the Red Sea: northern limit: Latitude 15°N; in the Gulf of Oman: Northern limit: Latitude 22°N; Eastern limit: Longitude 065°E; Southern limit: Latitude 5°S;- when ‘Best Management Practices’ to deter piracy is being followed fully but, on its own, is not deemed by the shipping company and the ship’s master as sufficient to protect against acts of piracy; AND- the use of armed guards is assessed to reduce the risk to the lives and wellbeing of those on board the ship.ï The policy applies to internationally trading passenger ships and cargo ships of 500 gross tonnage and above. The policy only applies in relation to the protection of UK registered ships.ï The assurance process for the authorisation of private maritime security companies is to ensure that as far as possible public safety is not endangered by the use of armed guards.ï Private Maritime Security Companies (PMSCs) wishing to employ armed guards on board UK registered ships in these exceptional circumstances must be authorised to possess a range of firearms (which may include section 1 and section 2 weapons), including those requiring an authority from the Secretary of State for the Home Department under section 5 of the 1968 Act, and be able to deploy them as necessary. All PMSCs wishing to employ armed guards on UK registered ships must receive clearance via the Home Office section 5 authorisation process.ï It is an offence for a person to have in his possession, purchase, acquire, manufacture, sell or transfer, or possess, purchase or acquire for sale or transfer, a weapon prohibited under section 5 of the 1968 Act without the authority of the Secretary of State. It is also an offence not to comply with any condition of the authority.Section 5 application: evidence28.1 PMSCs should apply to the Home Office for section 5 authorisation to enable their armed guards to possess firearms on UK registered ships. In support of their application they must produce a provisional contract or letter of intent with a shipping company intending to use their services. The PMSC may also provide evidence in support of the application such as information about transits over the previous 12 months. In selecting a PMSC the shipping company must have conducted a piracy risk assessment and satisfied itself that the PMSC and its personnel are reputable and suitably qualified, based on the Guidance issued by the Department for Transport. The PMSC must also ensure it is satisfied that the203
Guide on Firearms Licensing Lawguards it employs are suitable and properly trained, in accordance with the Department for Transport guidance.28.2 The shipping company is also required to submit its counter-piracy plan, which should follow the structure of Annex 1 in the DfT guidance, to the Department for Transport, including a signed statement that the Guidance has been followed.Armed guards: suitability28.3 As a general rule, having regard to the provisions of the Firearms Act 1968 and to the potential risks of harm that exist in the armed counter-piracy maritime environment, individuals who have any previous convictions or cautions for violence, disorder or other serious criminality will not be considered as suitable to receive Home Office clearance. There may also be circumstances where other police information or locally held police records on individuals may call into doubt the applicant’s suitability to undertake armed maritime security work. Each case will be considered on its merits.Armed guards: numbers28.4 The number of armed guards included in the application to be approved must be consistent with the evidence provided in support of the application and in any event should not exceed 30 guards in the initial application. Applications that have been submitted without sufficient justification for the number of guards included in the application are likely to be delayed and may be refused. Only those guards who will be employed on a UK registered ship will be considered2.28.5 A PMSC may submit an application for clearance for additional guards at any time, but the number of guards requested to be cleared on each occasion must not exceed 30. If a PMSC wishes to request clearance for additional guards following issue of a section 5 authority, evidence must be provided to show that the guards will be employed on a UK registered ship and that the additional guards are necessary. The number of guards to be checked must be kept to the minimum necessary to service the PMSC’s contract in order to prevent delay in processing of the section 5 application.Armed guards: duration of clearance28.6 Following the grant of a section 5 authority, when a PMSC wishes to submit further guards for clearance they should be aware of the following: guards are servants of the PMSC and their clearances are linked to the expiry date of the company’s section 5 authority. Therefore, when the PMSC’s section 5 authority expires, most guards will also need to have their clearances renewed at that time. However, guards whose clearances were carried out four months or less before the PMSC’s authority is due to expire do not need to have their clearance renewed. In cases where a PMSC has been given a three year authority, guards will need to have their clearances undertaken every 12 months, and the PMSC should submit an application to the Home Office on this basis.2 This only applies to guards on UK ships because the Firearms Act 1968 as a whole (and accordingly the section 5 requirement for an authority) applies to UK registered vessels rather than foreign registered vessels.204
Armed guards: information to be provided
Guide on Firearms Licensing Law
28.7 The following information should be provided in respect of each armed guard:ï full name (including any previous names)ï date and place of birthï residential addresses covering the previous five yearsï copy of the guard’s passportï and a declaration of consent to checks being carried out.28.8 A copy of the guard’s passport must be provided so that their identity can be verified. To speed up the application process PMSCs may wish to submit an enhanced Disclosure and Barring Service (DBS) certificate for each of the armed guards. PMSCs should not put forward people who, through their own due diligence checks, are not suitable.Disclosure and Barring Service (DBS)28.9 The Disclosure and Barring Service will, on payment of the appropriate fee, provide an Enhanced Disclosure for armed guards who are proposed to be deployed as part of a section 5 application. There will be an additional charge for the use of a Registered Body who will check and countersign applications and submit them to the DBS. Supply of DBS certificates is not mandatory, but if the PMSC does not provide DBS certificates then the cost of the checks will fall to the public purse. Although some police checks must still be carried out for each application, supply of a DBS certificate is likely to reduce the time taken to process the application.28.10 The DBS will issue each applicant with a certificate based on the individual’s criminal record, including any relevant local police information. This certificate can be submitted by the PMSC with the application. For the purposes of granting a section 5 authority, the DBS Disclosure should be no more than four months old at the time of application. The DBS has introduced an update service, which allows people (if they choose to subscribe to it and pay a small fee) to apply for a criminal record check to refresh their existing certificate, with employers checking online to see if it is still up to date. This avoids having to go through the full clearance process again.Armed guards who cease to be employed by the PMSC28.11 If an armed guard ceases to be employed (including as a sub contractor) by the PMSC once the section 5 authority is in place the Home Office must be informed immediately. Failure to do so will be a breach of the conditions of the section 5 authority and such a breach may result in revocation of the authority. If the PMSC wishes to employ new guards during this period they must provide the Home Office with each guard’s full details, and this may include a DBS certificate, so that the relevant checks can be carried out. The guard cannot be in possession of firearms until the PMSC is notified by the Home Office that the company’s section 5 conditions have been amended accordingly.205
Guide on Firearms Licensing LawArmed guards employed by a second PMSC28.12 A process has been introduced whereby one PMSC can utilise the services of another PMSC’s guards. This has been agreed on the basis that the Home Office is notified by the requesting PMSC, and provided that the guard is authorised by the Home Office and the parent PMSC still retains their services and provides confirmation by email or letter of this fact. Before proceeding, the requesting PMSC must receive confirmation from the Home Office that the arrangement is acceptable. If the requesting PMSC has obtained registered firearms dealer status there is no requirement for each guard to hold a firearm certificate in their own right.Non-UK PMSCs or armed guards28.13 PMSCs from other countries, or those wishing to use non-UK guards, may apply for section 5 authorisation only if the guards will be protecting UK vessels. The application process is similar to that for UK nationals. However, for a non-UK PMSC details will be required to show that the company is an accredited company and is registered with, or is a member of, the maritime and defence industry associations in the country of origin. Details will also be required for the company’s proposed named authority holder, who will be held accountable for any breaches and for the non-UK guards. A form will be provided, to be completed and returned to the Home Office for forwarding on to the UK Central Authority for the Exchange of Criminal Records checks (UKCA-ECR). If these checks cannot be completed, or the evidence is insufficient to make a decision based on ensuring public safety, then the application is likely to be refused.Types of firearms: section 1, section 2 and section 528.14 The PMSC must provide details of the number and type of section 5 prohibited firearms they wish to possess on board the UK registered ship, and why this number and type of weapon is necessary. All PMSCs must be authorised to possess section 5 firearms.28.15 Whether they will be in possession of section 1, section 2 or section 5 firearms, all guards must receive Home Office approval before they can be utilised by the PMSC on a UK registered ship. The requirement for each guard to be approved as part of the Home Office section 5 process not only enables a wide range of firearms to be used by the guard, it also forms an important part of the assurance process. The section 5 authorisation process is designed to encompass the appropriate checks for the possession of the most dangerous weapons and is subject to ministerial oversight. This level of authorisation is deemed necessary for armed guards in view of the circumstances in which the firearms are held, which involves greater risk than for those possessing guns for sport or wildlife management in the UK.206
Guide on Firearms Licensing LawPMSCs who wish to register as a firearms dealer (RFD)28.16 PMSCs may apply to the police to be registered as a firearms dealer, but this will not be approved until the PMSC has received section 5 authorisation from the Home Office. Once a section 5 authorisation has been issued, the police may approve registration as a firearms dealer for the applicant, and may specify that only those guards cleared by the Home Office can possess firearms. PMSCs who have already obtained RFD status and who wish to conduct maritime security operations on board UK registered vessels must proceed to submit their application for a section 5 authority to the Home Office.28.17 Under section 8 of the Firearms Act 1968 a registered firearms dealer and their servants are exempt from having to hold a firearms certificate in order to possess, purchase or acquire firearms or ammunition. Therefore, once the Home Office has issued the section 5 authority, followed by issue of the RFD by the police, there is no requirement for each armed guard who has been cleared by the Home Office to hold a firearm certificate in their own right, provided that the PMSC they are employed by, or to whom they are acting as a sub-contractor, is a registered firearms dealer.PMSCs who are not registered firearms dealers (RFDs)28.18 If a PMSC is not a registered firearms dealer then each of the armed guards will need to apply to their local police for a firearm certificate for the weapons specified in their own right, following issue of the section 5 authority to the PMSC. Given the additional administration involved, it is expected that most PMSCs will wish to become registered firearms dealers.Section 5 authorisation28.19 Once the necessary checks have been completed, if the Home Office is satisfied, a section 5 authority will be issued to the PMSC with conditions attached to ensure that the firearms will not endanger the public safety or the peace. It is an offence under section 5(5) of the Firearms Act 1968 to fail to comply with these conditions.28.20 A section 5 authority is issued initially for one year followed by three years at first renewal, unless there has been a breach of conditions or other public safety concerns.28.21 PMSCs should submit renewal applications for section 5 authorities, or requests for clearance for guards, at least four months before expiry in order to allow police sufficient time to carry out the necessary checks.Other issues28.22 Training: the maritime security industry is well-established with a number of PMSCs currently operating to protect shipping. The policy does not currently extend to authorisation of PMSCs to undertake maritime security training in the UK using live firearms, including training in the use of prohibited weapons. Work is underway to consider options for training standards and requirements in the future.207
Guide on Firearms Licensing Law28.23 Maritime accreditation has been taken forward at an international level by the ISO (International Organisation for Standardisation). ISO/PAS 28007 ‘Guidelines for Private Maritime Security Companies Providing Privately Contracted Armed Security Personnel on Board Ships’ was published in 2012. For the UK, the SCEG (Security in Complex Environments Group), was appointed by the UK Government as its industry partner for regulation and accreditation, and has been working to produce standards for the UK private security industry operating overseas in hazardous environments. The United Kingdom Accreditation Service (UKAS) has accredited Certification Bodies to issue certificates to UK and other PMSCs.Further information28.24 Further information on the issue of section 5 authorisations can be obtained from the gov.uk website.For detailed advice on how to apply, please consult the Home Office Guidance for the application for a section 5 authority for prohibited weapons and ammunition.In England and Wales, applications must be made to the Home Office electronically using the designated application portal.In Scotland, applications should be made to the Scottish Government:Firearms TeamSafer Communities Division St Andrew’s House EdinburgEH1 3DGScottish Government section 5 application form. email: firearms.enquiries@gov.scotTelephone: 0131 244 8525Summary process for maritime security applicationsï Shipping company selects the PMSC and draws up a draft contract/letter of intentï Shipping company submits its counter-piracy plan (CPP) to the Department for Transport, including a signed statement that the Guidance has been followed.ï The Department for Transport will advise the Home Office when a satisfactory CPP is received from the shipping company. Please note that the Home Office will not proceed with the section 5 application until they receive this notification.ï PMSC applies to Home Office for section 5 authority enclosing:- provisional contract/letter of intent with shipping company;- details of number and type of firearms and why these are required;208
Guide on Firearms Licensing Law- details of armed guards: full name, date and place of birth, residential addresses for the past five years, copy of passport, DBS certificate and declaration of consent to any additional police checks;- if the PMSC has obtained alternative supporting information on the guards, this information can also be included.ï PMSC can apply to local police to register as a firearms dealer (RFD).209
Guide on Firearms Licensing LawAppendix 1: List of relevant organisationsCountryside and conservationAssociation of Deer Management Groups British Deer SocietyCountry Land and Business Association Countryside AllianceCountryside Council for Wales English HeritageEnglish NatureThe National Gamekeepers’ Organisation St Hubert Club of Great BritainScottish Gamekeepers Association Scottish Landowners’ Federation Scottish Natural heritageGovernmentArts Council England Arts Council of Wales Creative Scotland Crown OfficeCrown Prosecution ServiceDepartment for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy Department for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office Forestry CommissionHealth & Safety ExecutiveHM Inspectorate of Constabulary and Fire & Rescue Services HM Inspectorate of Constabulary for ScotlandHM Revenue & Customs Ministry of Defence Northern Ireland Office Scottish GovernmentScottish Government Environment and Rural Affairs Department Scottish Government Justice DepartmentScotland OfficeWelsh Assembly GovernmentHistoric and antique firearmsHeritage Arms Study Group (HASG)Historical Breechloading Smallarms Association (HBSA) Museums Weapons GroupVintage Arms Association210
Other
Guide on Firearms Licensing Law
Birmingham Proof House British Medical Association British Pest Control Association British Veterinary AssociationEuropean Cartridge Research Association English Civil War SocietyGun Control NetworkHumane Slaughter Association International Maritime Organisation London Proof HouseThe Medical Defence Union LtdNational Association of Re-enactment Societies (NARES) National Farmers UnionNational Operatic and Dramatic Association Royal College of General PractitionersRoyal Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (RSPCA) Scottish Crofting FoundationThe Sealed Knot Showman’s GuildThe Sportsman’s Association of Great Britain and Northern Ireland UK Athletics LtdPoliceBritish Transport Police National Police Chiefs Council Police FederationPolice Service of Northern Ireland Police Service of Scotland Scottish Police FederationShooting organisations and associationsAssociation of Professional Clay Target Shooting Grounds Association of Professional Shooting InstructorsBritish Association for Shooting and Conservation (BASC) British ShootingBritish Shooting Sports Council (BSSC) British Western Shooting SocietyClay Pigeon Shooting Association (CPSA) The Gun Trade Association Ltd (GTA) Institute of Clay Shooting InstructorsInternational Long-Range Pistol Shooters Association Muzzle Loaders’ Association of Great Britain (MLAGB) National Rifle Association (NRA)National Small-bore Rifle Association (NSRA) National Target Shot gun Association (NTSA) The Shooting Sports Trust LtdUnited Kingdom Practical Shooting Association (UKPSA)211
Guide on Firearms Licensing LawAppendix 2: List of firearms formsTitleNumber*Application for grant or renewal of firearm or shot gun certificate201*Application to vary a firearm certificate201v*Firearm certificate202*Shot gun certificate204*Application for visitor’s firearm/shot gun permit107*Visitor’s firearm permit108*Visitor’s shot gun permit110*Permit to possess firearms or ammunition (authorised under section 7)111*Permit to possess shot guns (authorised under section 7)112*Auctioneer’s Firearm Permit213*Permit to remove from or to a ship, aircraft or aerodrome115*Application for registration as a firearms dealer116*Application for registration of additional place of business116A***Certificate of registration of firearms dealer117***Certificate of registration of additional place of business118***Notice of sale or transfer of firearms and ammunition119***Application to transfer firearms to N Ireland120***Authorisation to transfer firearms to N Ireland121***Authorisation to enter and inspect stock122***Authorisation to inspect gun club premises123***Application for approval of rifle and muzzle-loading pistol clubs124**Police register of firearms dealersN/A*Firearms dealer’s register of transactionsN/A* In the form prescribed, which must be followed** Also prescribed, but form not available from Stationery office*** Not prescribed, forms produced by the police212
Guide on Firearms Licensing LawAppendix 3: Conditions for firearm certificatesForces must ensure that where additional conditions are applied to certificates that they are kept to a minimum and are only applied where they are both proportionate and necessary.Where the firearm is authorised for more than one purpose, care must be taken to omit the word ‘only’ in the conditions.An asterisk conditions specific firearms on a certificate but may be replaced by the phrase, “The firearms and ammunition…..” where a single condition applies to all firearms (and ammunition) on the certificate.1. Quarry Shooting (for vermin, fox or deer)ï The *calibre RIFLE/COMBINATION/SMOOTH-BORE GUN/SOUND MODERATOR andammunition shall be used for shooting vermin including fox, and ground game/ deer (delete as appropriate) and any other lawful quarry, and for zeroing-practice on ranges, on land deemed suitable by the chief officer of police for the area where the land is situated and over which the holder has lawful authority to shoot.(The words underlined may be omitted once the certificate holder has demonstrated competence. There is no set time for this and each case should be considered on its individual merits).Automatic Condition for Section 1 Shot guns for Clay Pigeon Shooting (once “good reason” for possession has been demonstrated)ï The *calibre SMOOTH-BORE GUN may also be used for CLAY PIGEON SHOOTING.Condition for Section 1 Rifle which is also to be used overseasï The *calibre RIFLE and ammunition may also be carried when proceeding to or returning from a port of embarkation.2. Quarry Shooting – Birds with a Self-Loading Shot Gunï The *calibre SMOOTH-BORE GUN shall be used for SHOOTING BIRDS in accordance with the purpose, terms and conditions of the general licence currently issued by the DEFRA under the provisions of THE WILDLIFE AND COUNTRYSIDE ACT 1981.213
Guide on Firearms Licensing Law3. Quarry Shooting – Roe Deer in Scotlandï The *calibre RIFLE and ammunition/SOUND MODERATOR shall be used for SHOOTING ROE DEER as prescribed under the Deer (Firearms etc.) (Scotland) Order 1985 on land in Scotland, and zeroing on ranges or any land in Great Britain deemed suitable by the chief officer of police for the area where the land is situated and over which the holder has lawful authority to shoot.(The words underlined may be omitted once the certificate holder has demonstrated competence. There is no set time for this and each case should be considered on its individual merits).4. Quarry Shooting – Shot Pistolsï The *calibre SHOT PISTOL shall be used only in connection with SHOOTING VERMIN WITHIN OR AROUND BUILDINGS on land over which the holder has lawful authority to shoot.5. Overseas Useï The *calibre RIFLE shall be carried only when proceeding to or returning from a port of embarkation. It shall not be fired in Great Britain.orï The *calibre RIFLE and ammunition shall be carried when proceeding to or returning from a port of embarkation and may be zeroed in Great Britain on ranges which are legally and safely constructed and maintained.6. Humane Killing of Animalsï The *calibre *PISTOL/REVOLVER/RIFLE shall be used (only) in connection with the HUMANE KILLING OF ANIMALS (in their duties with *hunt/association3).ï The *calibre *PISTOL/REVOLVER, SOUND MODERATOR and ammunition shall be used (only) in connection with the HUMANE KILLING OF HORSES at * racecourse3 whilst a member of the ARVS.3 Insert name of hunt/association or racecourse.214
7. Slaughtering
Guide on Firearms Licensing Law
ï The *calibre *SLAUGHTERING INSTRUMENT and ammunition shall be used only for the SLAUGHTER OF ANIMALS. The holder is authorised to hire or borrow an additional slaughtering instrument in the event that the instrument to which this certificate relates is not available for use.8. Expanding Ammunition for pistolsï The certificate holder may possess, purchase or acquire expanding ammunition, or the missiles for such ammunition, in *calibre authorised by this certificate and for use only in connection with:(a) the lawful shooting of deer;(b) the shooting of vermin or, in connection with the management of any estate, other wildlife;(c) the humane killing of animals;(d) the shooting of animals for the protection of other animals or humans.9. Target Shootingï The *calibre *RIFLE/MUZZLE-LOADING PISTOL/REVOLVER and ammunition shall be used for target shooting, and only whilst a member of *club4, on ranges which are legally and safely constructed and maintained.10. Target Shooting – Club Gunsï The *firearm and ammunition shall be used for target shooting, and only whilst a member of *club4, and only on ranges suitable for the safe use of that class of firearm and with adequate financial arrangements in place to meet any injury or damage claim.11. Target Shooting – Shot gunsï The SMOOTH-BORE GUN/SOLID SLUG shall be used for practical target shooting:(a) The smoothbore gun(s) to which this certificate relates shall be used for target shooting on land or ranges where the holder has lawful authority to shoot (provided that adequate financial arrangements are in place to meet any injury or damage claim), for disciplines and courses of fire approved by the BWSS or NRA or NTSA or UKPSA.(a) 
Guide on Firearms Licensing Law(b) The solid slug ammunition to which this certificate relates shall be used for target shooting on ranges where the holder has lawful authority to shoot provided that adequate financial arrangements are in place to meet any injury or damage claim.Automatic Condition for Section 1 Shot guns for Clay Pigeon Shooting (once “good reason” for possession has been demonstrated)ï The *calibre SMOOTH-BORE GUN may also be used for CLAY PIGEON SHOOTING.12. Target Shooting – Section 1 Air Riflesï The *calibre *AIR RIFLE shall be used on ranges which are legally and safely constructed and maintained.13. Firearms of Historical Importance“Small firearms” held under section 7(1)ï A firearm identified by an asterisk in Part 1 or Part 2 of the certificate must be possessed, purchased or acquired by the holder of the certificate only for the purpose of its being kept or exhibited as part of a collection. Notwithstanding prescribed condition (4), it is at all times to be kept securely stored at *place5 unless transportation is authorised by the chief officer of police. Not to be fired.“Small firearms” held under section 7(3)ï The *calibre *PISTOL/REVOLVER is to be kept and used only at a place as designated by the Secretary of State or the Scottish Ministers in Scotland under section 7(3) of the Firearms (Amendment) Act 1997 namely, *place5.14. Collectionsï A firearm or ammunition identified by an asterisk in Part 1 or Part 2 of the certificate must be possessed, purchased or acquired by the holder of the certificate only for the purpose of its being kept or exhibited as part of a collection.- 	Not to be fired. or- The *calibre *firearm and ammunition may be used for target shooting, on ranges which are legally and safely constructed and maintained.- 
15. Trophies of War
Guide on Firearms Licensing Law
ï The *calibre *RIFLE/PISTOL/REVOLVER shall be possessed only as a TROPHY OF WAR. Not to be fired.16. Signalling Apparatusï The *calibre *PISTOL/LAUNCHER shall be used only for EMERGENCY SIGNALLING/ BIRDSCARING purposes.17. Controlling Racesï The *calibre *PISTOL/REVOLVER shall be used only in connection with CONTROLLING RACES at athletics meetings. The holder of this certificate shall recover the firearm(s) each day on which the firearm(s) is/are being used by persons controlling the races.ï The *calibre *CANNON shall be used only for CONTROLLING RACES.18. Historical Re-enactmentï The *calibre *CANNON/RIFLE/PISTOL/REVOLVER shall be used only WITH BLANK CHARGES OR BLANK AMMUNITION in connection with displays, battle re-enactments and demonstrations under the supervision of appointed officers of the * society6.19. Theatrical Useï The *calibre *firearm shall be used only in a theatrical or television performance or the rehearsal of such a performance or the production of a film. The holder of this certificate shall recover the firearm(s) after each performance, rehearsal or production in which the firearm(s) is/are being used by persons taking part.20. Treating Animalsï The *calibre *firearm and ammunition shall be used only in connection with the purpose of tranquillising or otherwise treating an animal. The holder is authorised to hire or borrow additional equipment in the event that the instrument to which this certificate relates is not available for use.ï 
Guide on Firearms Licensing Law21. Young Shootersï THIS NOTICE DOES NOT FORM PART OF THE CONDITIONS. The certificate holder may not purchase or hire any firearm or ammunition prior to *date7 when he/she will attain the age of eighteen years.The following condition(s) must be added to a young person’s certificate when the certificate is granted, varied or renewed:Firearmï Until such time as the holder of this certificate attains the age of 18 years, aï parent,ï guardian orï other person aged 18 years or over who is authorised under the Firearms Act 1968, to possess the firearms and ammunition to which this certificate relates,as agreed by the chief officer of police who issued this certificate, [*insert name] is responsible for the secure storage of the firearm(s) and respective ammunition to which this certificate relates.Shot gunï Until such time as the holder of this certificate attains the age of 18 years, aï parent,ï guardian orï other person aged 18 years or over who is authorised under the Firearms Act 1968 to possess shot guns,as agreed by the chief officer of police who issued this certificate, [*insert name] is responsible for the secure storage of the shot gun(s) and respective ammunition to which this certificate relates.
Guide on Firearms Licensing LawAppendix 4: Young persons and firearms lawNote that the issuing of firearm or shot gun certificates are dealt with separately – see chapters 7, 10 and 11Under 18Under 17Under 15Under 141. Purchase any firearm or ammunitionNoNoNoNo2. Possesssection 1 firearmYesYesYesNoExemptions1,2,3 (see below)3. Receive giftof section 1 firearmYesYesYesNo4. Possessassembled shot gunYesYesNoNoExemptions4,5 (see below)4,5 (see below)5. Receive shot gun as giftYesYesNoNo6. Possess air weapon or ammunition for an air weapon (see note below)NoNo2,3,4,6 (see below)NoNoExemptions2,3,4,6 (see below)2,3,4,6 (see below)2,3,4,6 (see below)7. Receive air weapon, or its ammunition, as a gift (see note below)NoNoNoNoExemptions1. Carry for sporting purpose.2. Rifle/Pistol Club or cadet corps3. Miniature rifle range.4. Under supervision of someone 21 years or over.5. Secure gun cover (but this exemption is not available in respect of air pistols).6. On private land with the consent of the occupier.NOTE – air weapons are subject to certification in Scotland (see Chapter 7)
Guide on Firearms Licensing LawAppendix 5: Schedule of mass-produced antique air weapons whose production period pre-dates 1939Air weapons from the 17th - 19th century are readily identifiable and tend to be of the pre- charged pneumatic type with detachable reservoirs. They fall into two main types: those which resemble conventional firearms and those which are modelled on walking sticks.Bellows and compressed spring mechanisms are also encountered.The beginning of the 20th century saw the introduction of mass-produced air weapons. Below are lists of air weapons which were mass-produced before 1939.Air rifles and air gunsBonehill BritanniaBritannia "Anglo Sureshot Mk 1" Improved BritanniaBSA L Model BSA H ModelBSA Lincoln Model BSA Improved Model B BSA Improved Model D BSA Military Pattern BSA "A" SeriesBSA Standard Model (T Prefix and Club Specials) BSA "Break Action" Crank operated gallery rifles/guns (all types).Daisy M 1901 Daisy B-1000 Daisy Model C Daisy Model H Daisy Number 12Daisy Model 29Daisy Model 40Diana Model 16Diana Model 20Diana Model 25 Diana "Break Action" Diana Model 48 "Gem" all typesGiffard compressed CO2 all types. Greener "Break Action"Haenel Model I D R P Haenel Model II Haenel Model III Haenel Model IV Haenel Model VIIIHaenel Model X, XV and XX Haenel Model 45
Guide on Firearms Licensing LawHot ShotLane's Musketeer Langenhahn "Favorit 1" Langenhahn "Millita" Models Markham (all models) MarcoMidland Gun Co Demon "Break Action" Midland Gun Co "Perfecta"Pfeil (all models)Precision air rifle (Oscar Will) Quackenbush (all models) Remington Model 26Roland Model 1927 (marketed under various names) Speedy air rifleTell air rifles (Oscar Will) Webley Mark 1Webley Mark 2 Service air rifleAir pistolsAccles & Shelvoke "Warrior" Anson "Firefly"Bedford and Walker "Eureka" BritanniaDaisy "Targeteer" (fixed rear sight = pre 1940) Diana Model 1EmGe "Zenit" Haenel 26Haenel 28Haenel 28 RepeaterHubertus (as sold by Midland Gun Co) Iver Johnson "Champion"Lincoln Jefferies "The Lincoln" Pope Bros "Rifle" QuackenbushSiptononSnow & Cowe "Kalamazoo" Tell IITell IIITitan (Frank Clarke, Birmingham?) Westley Richards "Highest Possible"Webley Mark 1 (straight butt with wooden grips)Webley Mark 1 (raked butt with plastic grips, No knurled section on barrel) Webley "Junior" (wooden or pressed steel grips; post war have rounded butt) Webley Mark II TargetWebley "Senior" (Straight butt wooden grips)Webley "Senior" (Slant butt plastic grips. Highest known serial no17578)
Guide on Firearms Licensing LawNOTES:1. This list is not definitive.2. There is a significant class of air pistols with push-in spring loaded barrels which are generically referred to as "Gat" or "Gat type". Those which predate 1939 are as follows:Briton, Briton De-Luxe and Super Briton DollaDolla (William Tell) Diana Model 2 Limit
Guide on Firearms Licensing LawAppendix 6: Conditions for registration of firearms dealersFor inclusion with all registrations:i) Reasonable measures shall be taken to maintain the safekeeping of all firearms and ammunition dealt with or kept in the course of the registered firearms dealer’s business.Additional conditions to be imposed in individual cases: (e.g. at other places of temporary business such as fairs etc.)ii) All firearms shall be * (secured in a locked rack) (kept fastened together by means of a chain/approved security cord passing through the trigger guards and anchored to the frame or rack in which the firearms are secured) in publically accessible venues and shall not be removed unless this is necessary for a particular purpose connected with the certificate holder’s business as a firearms dealer. (* Delete the words in brackets which are not applicable)iii) All handguns shall be kept in a locked safe or suitable secure cabinet and shall not be removed unless this is necessary for a particular purpose connected with the certificate holder’s business as a firearms dealer.iv) Ammunition shall be kept separately under lock and key.v) Glass panels of doors shall be covered by steel grilles and windows shall be barred, subject to requirements for emergency escape routes.vi) The holder of this certificate shall notify the chief officer of police in writing if at any time he/she commences dealing in firearms to which section 1 of the Firearms Act 1968 applies.vii) The holder of this certificate shall notify the chief officer of police in writing if at any time he/she commences dealing in firearms other than flare signal pens.viii) No firearms or ammunition shall be (handled or)* stored at the registered premises without prior notice to the chief officer of police. (This condition should be used in respect of dealers who do not physically handle firearms or ammunition). [* delete words in brackets if not applicable]i) 
Guide on Firearms Licensing LawAppendix 7: Guidance on secure keeping of firearmsConditions of SecurityFirearms Act 1968, Amendment Acts 1988 & 1997The Firearms Rules 1998 state “firearms or shot guns to which a certificate relates must be stored securely at all times so as to prevent, so far as is reasonably practicable, access to the guns by unauthorised persons.”A registered firearms dealer certificate is conditioned to require that “Reasonable measures shall be taken to maintain the safekeeping of all firearms and ammunition dealt with or kept in the course of the registered firearms dealer’s business.”Auctioneers, carriers and warehousemen are required by the Firearms (Amendment) Act 1988 to “take reasonable precautions for the safe custody of the firearms and ammunition in his or his servants possession in the course of his business.”Conditions on an Authority of the Secretary of State/Scottish Ministers for the holding of weapons etc to which section 5 of the 1968 Act applies, include “that the prohibited weapons are stored at no place other that the company premises at [ ] under secure conditions as agreed with and satisfactory to the chief officer of [ ] police”, and “that the prohibited weapons are transported under secure conditions agreed with and satisfactory to the chief officer of [ ] police.”One of the conditions for Home Office approved rifle and muzzle-loading pistol clubs requires that “the security arrangements for the storage of club firearms and/or ammunition are to the satisfaction of the chief officer of police for the area or areas in which the firearms and/or ammunition are stored.”The requirements for a museum firearm licence include that: “the Secretary of State/Scottish Ministers shall not grant a licence unless, after consulting the chief officer of police for the area; he is satisfied that the arrangements for exhibiting and keeping firearms and ammunition in question are or will be such as not to endanger the public safety or the peace. A licence shall be subject to such conditions specified in it as the Secretary of State/Scottish Ministers thinks necessary for securing safe custody of the firearms and ammunition in question.”General Construction & StandardsThese specifications are an indication of the relative construction/fabrication of items that would provide the resistance sought in their given application. It is quite possible to produce an acceptable level using alternative strategies, materials or their application.The test is whether the alternatives on balance provide resistance which can equate to that provided by the contained specification. The Standards quoted in this document should provide a base line for these. Certain of these standards provide testing measures
Guide on Firearms Licensing Lawfor resistance or deterrence against which the overall prevention of the theft of the firearm(s) can be assessed.Summaries of the appropriate standards can be found in the Firearms Security Handbook.Certain recommendations in this section involve structural adaptation. You should be aware that there is a need to ensure that any recommendation made will not cause any problems in relation to load bearing of floors or walls that may cause damage. It is important that applicants are advised that professional advice should be sought before embarking on projects of this nature.When proposing security for domestic and commercial premises, no requirements can be implemented that compromise the provisions for safe exiting from such premises, required in both the Building and Fire Safety controls.The style of security required must be reasonable for each situation.CabinetsCabinets which may be considered to be suitable for the security of firearms, shot guns and ammunition should be expected to provide the resistance equal to:a) a cabinet manufactured and fitted as certified to comply with BS7558:1992;orb) a cabinet fabricated to the following:i) Sheet steel body of not less than 2mm (14swg), formed by either folding, continuous welding or a combination of these methods;when fabricating the body, the door case should be constructed to provide a continuous rest plate the length of the opening edge to prevent attack on the lockbolts by inserting a hacksaw blade;the door frame may be formed by return bending of the body steel or the provision of a bar or angle frame, welded to the carcass with sufficient relief to the edges to provide for door locking and hanging. The frame should be designed so that the door, when closed, can resist attempts to force it inwards.doors should be formed from the same material with either bent, folded or post formed edges, or the provision of a bracing frame of bar or angled steel, or ribs welded to the inside of the door to prevent the flexing or bending of the door when closed;hinges internally fitted;hinges externally fitted, with either hinge bolts, anti-bar plates or interlocking formed door edge, along the hanging side of the door;swivel bars or rods with return fold anti-bar plate. The frame should be fabricated to prevent, so far as possible, the insertion of tools to cut the pins; or
Guide on Firearms Licensing Law
Safes
for slot in type doors, not less than 2 steel pins of 12mm diameter or full width welded steel foot plate not less than door thickness.ii) Secured by:locks to BS3621 – 2017 or 7 lever safe locks with not less than 38mm x 9mm cross section steel bolts; orpadlocks not less than CEN 4. Close shackle padlocks should be selected on open ring or plate staples.Locks specified above, with the exception of padlocks, should be mounted on steel brackets or pockets, providing strength equal to that of the door and welded to the door.Hinged full-length doors for rifles/shot guns, should be fitted with two locking devices fitted at points to divide the locking edge into equal parts.Alternatively, the door may have a driven bolt/multi-point locking system, either key or lever operated, providing:a) three bolts operating equally along the opening edge or opening edge, top and bottom;b) the bolts to provide resistance equal to that in BS3621-2017;c) a lever driven system to be secured by a lock to BS3621- 2017 or equivalent.On slide-in, fully braced doors, the number and location of the lock(s) will be determined by the degree of absence of flexing in the door.Padlocks should have steel staples, hasp/staple, or pad bars fabricated to equate to the protective strength of the lock.Provision of at least 4 fixing holes to take not less than 10mm diameter fastening devices. The holes to be spaced to provide maximum binding of cabinet to structure.When ammunition or firing mechanisms are to be kept separately from the firearms, a smaller cabinet of similar construction or a separately lockable container, either as an extension of the cabinet, or internally fabricated, can be manufactured.
Assuming they are physically capable of containing a firearm, commercially manufactured safes may be considered suitable for the securing of firearms. Even early models, if tight and in good condition can provide physical protection that would be above that expected on a cabinet constructed to BS7558-1992. The following considerations should be applied as appropriate:Safes weighing less than 20 cwt should be secured to the floor in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions, or in the case of one already possessed, that from a manufacturer or safe engineer.
Guide on Firearms Licensing LawSafes have a considerable floor loading implication. Advice must be sought for any proposal to fit a safe on other than a solid ground floor.To protect those safes with thinner plate backs, they must always be installed with the back against a solid wall or be built into a wall or recess to prevent attack at the rear.Where the safe is secured by driven bolt work, a single key lock or dial lock (either combination or digital) is often provided. Unless there is some particular requirement, double locking is not necessary.ClampsClamps which may be considered to be suitable for the security of a single firearm or shot gun should be:Steel plate construction, not less than 2 mm (14 swg), all external joints to be seam welded or of bend construction.Secured by a lock to BS3621-2017; 7 lever safe locks with not less than 38 mm x 9 mm cross section steel bolts; a lock on the HELA Tech doc 26/95; security padlocks not less than CEN 4.Configured to enclose firearm action and trigger(s).Provided with at least two fixing points to allow fixing devices not less than 10 mm diameter being used.Fixed in such a location to frustrate attack on the fixings.Cable LocksFlexible or semi-rigid devices for the secure fastening of single weapons which provide the restraint equal to:a) spun steel security cables, not less than 8 mm diameter excluding any sleeve;b) fitted with integral anchorage plate suitable for fastening with non-return security fixings;c) secured by a close fitting padlock not less than CEN 3 up to CEN 4 or in-built security locking device.Information on other security provisions are contained in the Firearms Security Handbook.
Guide on Firearms Licensing LawAppendix 8: Taking of firearms (including air weapons) to Northern Ireland by visitors from Great Britain1. The requirements for the taking of firearms (including air weapons) to Northern Ireland by persons in Great Britain are as follows:Bullet Firing Weapons and Specially Dangerous Air Weapons (Section 1 Firearms)2. Such weapons may be taken into Northern Ireland provided that the visitor holds a valid Great Britain firearm certificate in respect of that weapon.Shot guns3. Such weapons may be taken into Northern Ireland provided that the visitor holds a valid Great Britain shot gun certificate showing a full description of the shot gun in question.Air weapons other than specially dangerous ones4. Such weapons may be taken into Northern Ireland provided that the visitor holds a valid Certificate of Approval issued by the Chief Constable of the Police Service of Northern Ireland showing a full description of the air weapon in question. A valid Certificate of approval is required for an air gun which is capable of discharging a missile so that the missile has, on being discharged, a kinetic energy in excess of one joule.1. 
Guide on Firearms Licensing LawAppendix 9: Conditions for visitor’s firearm or shot gun permit(i) The holder must, on receipt of this permit, sign it in ink with their usual signature(ii) The holder of this permit must inform at once the chief officer of police by whom this permit was granted of the theft, destruction, deactivation or loss in Great Britain of any firearm or ammunition (shot gun) to which it relates and/or the theft, loss or destruction in Great Britain of this permit.(iii) The holder of this permit must, without undue delay, inform the chief officer of police by whom this permit was granted of any change in their notified arrangements insofar as it relates to the grant of this permit.(iv) ?(a) The firearm and ammunition(shot gun) to which this permit relates must at all times (except in the circumstances set out in paragraph (b) below) be stored securely so as to prevent, so far as is reasonably practicable, access to the firearm or ammunition (shot gun) by an unauthorised person.(b) Where a firearm or ammunition (shot gun) to which this permit relates is in use or the holder of the permit has the firearm (shot gun) with them for the purpose of cleaning, repairing or testing it or for some purpose connected with its use, transfer or sale, or the firearm or ammunition (shot gun) is in transit to or from a place in connection with its use or any such purpose, reasonable precautions must be taken for the safe custody of the firearm or ammunition (or shot gun).(v) The holder of this permit must, on written request, return the permit to the chief officer of police without delay.(vi) The firearm(s) and ammunition to which this permit relates shall be used only at [place of event/use or event(s)] [name of event(s)/competition(s)] or target shooting on ranges suitable for the safe use of that class of firearm and with adequate financial arrangements in place to meet any injury or damage claim.(vii) The firearm(s) and ammunition to which this permit relates shall be used only on [land over which shooting is to take place].(viii) The firearm(s) and ammunition to which this permit relates shall be used only on [land over which shooting is to take place] and on other land over which the holder has lawful authority to shoot. The following is required as a standard condition for a shot gun visitor’s permit.(ix) The holder of this permit must, without undue delay, inform the chief officer of police who issued the permit of the details of any shot gun which the holder has purchased or otherwise acquired; and must enter the details of each such shot gun in the appropriate part of this permit.(i) 

© Crown copyright 2022This publication is licensed under the terms of the Open Government Licence v3.0 except where otherwise stated. To view this licence, visit nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open- government-licence/version/3Where we have identified any third party copyright information you will need to obtain permission from the copyright holders concerned.
FIREARMS SECURITY HANDBOOK2020Produced by the FELWG, the National Police Chiefs Council in England, Wales and Scotland and the British Shooting Sports Council
CONTENTSParagraphPart 1: Introduction and principles relating to the secure storage of firearms	1.1Part 2: Section 1 and 2 firearmsGeneral aspects	2.1Layers and levels of security	2.12Mobile homes and static caravan units	2.25Integral garage security	2.36Ammunition	2.46Private collections of section 1 and 2 firearms	2.49Section 5 firearms and other articles requiring section 5 authority	2.50Safe keeping of keys	2.58Part 3: Firearms held for professional or specific business purposes	3.1Slaughtering instruments	3.2Firearms for humane killing or treatment of animals	3.4Veterinary use	3.5Starting pistols	3.10Auctioneers	3.13Warehousemen	3.16Carriers	3.24Part 4: Firearms DealersGeneral aspects	4.1Dealers operating from dwellings	4.16Dealers operating under section 5 authority	4.24Part 5: Home Office approved rifle and muzzle loading pistol clubs, and cadet corpsGeneral aspects	5.1Cadet Force premises	5.8
Part 6: Firearms held under Museums Licence/private CollectionsMuseums and Galleries6.1Private Collections and collections on public display6.39Conditions on movement and display of section 7(1) firearms6.50Conditions for sites designed under section 7(3) (historic handguns)6.54Part 7: Firearms and ammunition in transitCarriage by road – section 1 and 2 firearms and ammunition7.1Section 5 firearms and/or ammunition – commercial carriage by road7.20Section 5 items for professional purposes7.44For display purposes7.49Carriage of Dangerous Goods & Use of Transportable Pressure Equipment Regulations7.53Annex A: General construction and standardsGeneral aspects1.Cabinets7.1Safes13.Display cabinets18.Clamps21.Cable locks22.Gun enclosure23.Gun room29.Armoury building42.Annex B:	Guidance on good practice: Carriage (by private individuals) of black powder & small arms ammunition for use in small arms and model rocket motorsAnnex C:	Illustration of construction points in a gun cabinetAnnex D:	List of standards referred to in this Handbook
PART 1: INTRODUCTION & PRINCIPLES RELATING TO THE SECURE STORAGE OF FIREARMS1.1 It is a condition of the issue of a firearm certificate that the firearms and shotguns to which the certificate relates must be stored securely at all times (except in certain circumstances) so as to prevent, so far as is reasonably practicable, access to the guns by unauthorised persons. This requirement is also to be found, in similar terms, in conditions attached to the registration of a firearms dealer and Home Office Approved Rifle and Muzzle-Loading Pistol Clubs. Anyone holding a Museum Licence is required to have secure, safe custody arrangements for firearms etc. in their possession. Security conditions are expressed in the Authority for Section 5 articles, where both the premises and transportation of those items are subject to security satisfactory to both the Secretary of State and the Chief Officer of Police. A general duty of care for security applies to auctioneers, carriers and warehousemen when they have possession or control over firearms during the normal course of their business.1.2 The term “unauthorised persons” means any person who does not have a certificate allowing them to possess the guns of the holder.1.3 Shotgun (section 2) ammunition is not covered by this condition, but it is advisable that ammunition is stored safely.1.4 This document addresses what may be considered to fulfil these criteria in the more usual circumstances. It is not a statement of the law but aims to provide general guidelines for the security of firearms. It is the responsibility of certificate holders in each case to ensure that they comply with the conditions of the possession of those firearms. This document provides a guide to the advice that might be given to those persons on the principles and mechanics of security. This advice must always be tempered with common sense and a view to the distinctive conditions that surround the application.1.5 This guidance should be applied with full regard to the individual circumstances and the type and location of the premises subject to any recommendations. It is important that the proposals in each case take into account the safety of the occupants of the premises; in particular, attention is drawn to the provisions of the Fire Safety Acts, building regulations and the Occupiers Liability Act.1.6 Your attention is also drawn to the building regulations in respect of provisions for emergency escapes from buildings including dwellings. For security purposes in this document, no requirement can be made in respect of a window or other opening which has been provided as an emergency escape that will in any way prevent the immediate and unobstructed use of that escape route. If there is a conflict between the need for firearms security and any regulations made for the safety of persons in that building, then advice must be sought from the agency responsible for the regulations.1.7 There are many factors that require consideration, which may include the following:a) A risk assessment based on the levels of property crime in the area. These may be subject to sudden temporary changes and it is helpful to look at the longer-term trends of property crime in an area, which are the more important factors.b) The remoteness or otherwise of the premises, and the potential response to calls for assistance, either by police or neighbours.a) 
c) The manner in which the property is overlooked and/or illuminated. These levels of natural surveillance afford the property a degree of protection;d) The amount of time of which the property is occupied or left unoccupied;e) The location of storage points within the property and, where appropriate, the distribution of firearms within each secure point;f) The attractiveness of the type of firearms to criminals. For example, modern multi-shot handguns may be more attractive to criminals than most other types of gun;g) The number of firearms held and;h) Whether it is generally known that firearms are stored on the premises.1.8 Any references to commercial products in this document do not imply any approval of that manufacturer, but are given to illustrate what is available, or where such items may be acquired. Many other manufacturers and suppliers are available and so far as their products conform with or exceed any relative standards quoted they may be considered fit for the purpose.1.9 The Security Handbook is divided into parts that cover specific areas, a number of which inter-relate. Setting aside this introduction, Part 2 deals with the application to private individuals’ ownership of firearms, Parts 3 to 6 cover the more specialised areas (possession for professional purposes, firearms dealers, clubs, museums and collections) and Part 7 looks at security considerations for transport. Technical specifications are given in the Annexes.1.10 The following abbreviations are used in this document: FA1968 = Firearms Act 1968F(A)A1988 = Firearms (Amendment) Act1988F(A)A1997 = Firearms (Amendment) Act 1997
PART 2 – SECTIONS 1 AND 2 FIREARMS (FA1968)2.1 The security of firearms, section 1 ammunition and shotguns within a dwelling can in most cases be achieved using a cabinet designed for this purpose. New cabinets should conform to the requirements of BS7558 (1992) (see Annex C for examples on points of construction). The cabinet should be fixed to the structure and located to frustrate attack or identification by persons visiting the premises. Many older cabinets will be built to perfectly satisfactory standards and if satisfactory, need not be replaced.2.2 As an additional level of security, ammunition and easily removable component parts – such as rifle bolts etc. - may be stored separately from the firearms they fit. This could be either by use of a detached storage container fitted elsewhere in the dwelling, or one built into or onto the firearms cabinet. Constructed to the same standard as the gun cabinet under BS7558 (1992).2.3 Security should involve the physical securing of the firearms, and the process to manage access control, such as security of keys. This maybe especially important if there are children at the premises.2.4 Security should not be located so inaccessibly as to deter the certificate holder from securing his or her guns after use.2.5 Under most circumstances, it is preferable that firearms should be secured within the occupied part of the structure. Separate, detached buildings, or those attached but having only external access (e.g. outhouses, garages etc.) should not be used unless the levels of security meet the standard. If used, these should also be protected by an intruder alarm linked to the household to BS EN 50131.2.6 In some homes it might be acceptable to place the cabinet in a garage. If this is done it should be secured to 2.36 to 2.46.2.7 If the certificate holder’s dwelling is a mobile home or static caravan, a different set of security concepts should be adopted (see paragraphs 2.25 to 2.35). These are primarily concerned with the anchorage of the structure. That structure's capability to store items securely may well require an interim layer of security to 'target harden' the unit. It is unlikely that a gunroom can satisfactorily be constructed within such a dwelling or unit of this type.2.8 There is a need to consider other alternatives for unusual firearms such as Punt Guns, cannon etc. In these cases, such items need to be secured in buildings other than the dwelling. Suitable securing points may be required where the situation or construction of such buildings make it necessary. Where possible any removable part that would render the gun inactive should be stored separately. The standards set out in this guidance should be followed when it comes to the storage of these items.2.9 When advising on the location of any security cabinet, remember that most steel gun cabinets have a high weight-to-footprint ratio. The average floor loading for a suspended floor on timber joists is 56lbs per square foot. A 9-gun cabinet with a 24" x 12" (608 x 304mm) footprint can be in the order of 126 lbs, which equates to more than a safe average suspended floor loading. Obviously, any fixing to a wall will reduce this loading. Joist ends are a more suitable fixing location than joist runs. In a loft installation for a cabinet, care needs to be exercised. Not all lofts have joists calculated to include weight loading other than that of the ceiling below. It is not uncommon for joists in lofts to be 40% smaller in cross sections than joists carrying floors. Full use must therefore be made of the support from structural walls carrying such joists. If there is any doubt, the applicant/certificate holder should obtain proper structural advice.2.1 
2.10 Fixings for security devices form an important part of the overall resistance to attack. Fastening to timber studded walls should be avoided, unless some additional anchorage can be provided. Floor or roof joists (subject to the previous comments 2.9) are acceptable.Walls of brick, concrete or masonry are usually the best bonding materials. It is important that the fixing chosen is correct for that material (e.g. expanding bolts, chemical anchors, toggle bolts etc.). With modern building materials, particularly breeze and thermal block walls, the materials are not particularly suited to normal fixing devices.Any firearm security cabinet etc. should be sited out of view from people both inside and outside the building. Securing to suitable building walls within built-in furnishings, e.g. wardrobes, cupboards, etc. can prove effective. Rooms such as lofts and cellars for example, that are unlikely to be visited by casual visitors, are options.However, when recommending such places, it is important to consider whether the environment is suitable. Extremes in temperature, dampness, condensation etc. may militate against such use, as not only could it result in damage to the firearms and ammunition but particularly in damp areas, it may cause erosion of the fixings or the cabinet material, thus reducing its security.2.11 When security devices are being fitted, consideration should be given to varying the method of fixing. For example, in buildings with only partition internal walls and modern insulation block lining or random stone walls, it can be perfectly acceptable to fix cabinets horizontally, as long as appropriate fixing devices are used. This will also assist when fastening into suspended wooden flooring, as it spreads the load more evenly. In this case, coach screws of at least 3/8" (8mm) diameter and not less than 2.5" (63mm) long will provide a suitable anchorage. Such fixings must of course be made into joists and not simply to the floor boarding. Another consideration should be the size and weight of the larger form of gun cabinet or commercial safe. Due to their very weight or size, fixing may be unnecessary in these cases, but they should be located in such a position that would further frustrate removal.Layers and Levels of Security2.12 As with any other valuable article, the security of firearms should be considered in layers:ï Perimeter - The protection of the surroundings etc. which are necessary for particular situations or risks. Exterior lighting, approaches overlooked etc;ï Shell - The protection of the surrounding structure (the building or part of a building) which contains the immediate or core layer for the firearms;ï Interior - Which secures the firearms directly.2.13 In most circumstances, the shell and interior layers are likely to be all that need to be addressed. However, conditions which affect either the ability of the outer structure to provide a defensive level commensurate with the particular risks, or any constraints upon the occupier (e.g. crime level, property style or type of construction, constraints in tenanted property etc.) may require adjustments to either layer.2.14 If the occupant can show that the house has been designed and built to the requirements of BS8220 (the 'Secured by Design' model, introduced in 1996) or has doors and windows to BS PAS 24 (2016) or the most up to date PAS standard, then those parts of the dwelling can be taken to have satisfactory security. The Secured by Design New Homes Guide is a source of reference. Other test standards for door and window sets such as LPS 1175 and STS 201.2.1 
2.15 For the purposes of security in this document, no requirement can be made in respect of a window or other opening which has been provided as an emergency escape that will in any way prevent the immediate and unobstructed use of that escape route.2.16 It may be helpful to think of security in terms of broad 'levels' to be applied according to the circumstances of each case. These are not intended to be prescriptive, but rather to provide guidance on what might be considered proportionate in each case. Level 1 (below) would be considered the normal standard of security applicable to the majority of cases.Level 12.17 A gun cabinet, or (where only one rifle or shotgun is held and a low level of risk is involved) a gun clamp or similar device fixed to the building is normally considered to be reasonable security. This should be located to frustrate or obstruct points of attack and identification by casual visitors to the premises. Other considerations might be:ï Final exit doors of good construction, ideally PAS24 and secured with locks to the appropriate British Standard.ï Suitable locks/securing devices on ground floor windows and French/patio windows.Level 22.18 Where the individual circumstances are such that additional security might be required due to factors such as:ï Repeat victimisationï High-crime locationï Building regularly unoccupied,ï Substantial number of firearms on the premisesIn addition to the provision of a suitable cabinet, gun room or safe, the following may be considered:a) The final exit door locks should be to BS3621 (2016) or equivalent and any French Doors/Patio Windows should have an integral locking system or be provided with supplementary locks to delay forcible opening, together with anti-lift blocks if applicable. These requirements will usually be met in properties with UPVC doors or specialist doors with a multi-locking system secured by deadlock.b) Windows on the ground floor and those accessible from flat roofs etc. should be fitted with an appropriate type and number of locks which are self-latching or key operated. These should have casement-to-frame locking along the opening edge.c) An audible intruder alarm to the appropriate standard protecting either the whole premises or those parts of the premises where guns are stored.a) 
2.19 The latest Secured by Design New homes guide provides guidance on Home Security for new and refurbished properties and is considered to be the Police Preferred specification for home builders.2.20 In the case of outbuildings or garages where the main building is not alarmed, consideration should be given for a stand-alone monitored alarm.2.21 For these purposes, a “substantial” number of firearms should be considered with regard to the type of firearms, their potential danger if misused and their likely attractiveness to criminals – for example, forces may wish to exclude muzzle loading shotguns and muzzle loading rifles given they rarely feature in criminal use. At the lower end the number might vary between six and ten, depending on the type of firearm concerned, whilst anything over ten would rarely be lower than level 2. It must be stressed, however, that it is not enough to base an assessment on the number of firearms alone – all factors mentioned above and in paragraph 2.20 should be taken into account. Sound moderators, spare barrels, spare cylinders and component parts should not be considered as part of the total.2.22 A different form of security which equates to that above (such as providing a reinforced gun room or other area), may also be suitable. Advice should be sought from Firearms Licencing.Level 32.23 If the risk is assessed as being greater than the previous level due to additional factors such as:ï Higher crime rate,ï Certain high-profile certificate holdersï Any other factors which substantially increase the risk of burglary, a larger number of firearms heldThen the following should be considered as well as the previous level of security:a) Dividing the risk, for example by the provision of separate cabinets, perhaps in different locations within the premises, to break down the number of firearms per enclosure.b) Additional target hardening of the storage (cabinet with individual gun locks, or extending to a gun room).c) Protected by an intruder alarm to BS4737 3.30:2015 or equivalent and ideally monitored by a NSI monitoring centre with an appropriate response.2.24 For these purposes, a “larger” number of firearms may be taken as meaning more than twelve guns (again being cognisant as to whether to include the likes of muzzle loading firearms). As with level two, it is not enough to base an assessment on the number of firearms alone – other factors in paragraph2.23 are equally if not more important, and regard must also be had to the type of firearms, their potential danger if misused and their likely attractiveness to criminals as well as the factors mentioned in that paragraph. Sound moderators, spare barrels, spare cylinders and component parts should not be considered as part of the total.
Mobile Homes & Static Caravan Units2.25 The unit should be site fixed or any wheels and towing assemblies removed or disabled to prevent its immediate removal.2.26 Where there is doubt about the fixture, supplementary anchorage with ground anchors, locking plates or security chains should be used.2.27 The area between the ground level and underside should either be enclosed with secure cladding, or the area giving access to that part of the chassis securing the cabinet should be protected to prevent unauthorised access to that area.2.28 A cabinet to BS7558 or better, or a commercial safe ideally to EN1143-1 (Grade 1,2 or 3) should be used in dwellings of this type. Ideally (because of the construction of some mobile homes) cabinets of heavier construction may be warranted or a dual layer system to protect the area of installation. When considering installing heavier cabinets or safes the load bearing capacity of these structures must be considered.2.29 The cabinet should be located in a position making attack on it difficult.2.30 The cabinet should be concealed in an area which is not easily/normally accessed (e.g. inside fitted lockers).2.31 The cabinet should have the maximum number of its anchorage points attached to the chassis of the unit. The blind heads of any fixings should be outside, with the threaded nut within the cabinet. It may be prudent to have the fixing points welded to the chassis.2.32 Alloy chassis require special consideration. If the structure is in doubt the provision of bearing plates not less than 4mm thick and large enough to span several adjoining chassis members can be fitted. Alternatively, the below method can be utilised.2.33 Where the chassis is not substantial, a concrete pad containing securing bolts to attach to the security device should be made underneath the unit.2.34 Ground anchors can also be adapted for this purpose. These should have a protective enclosure to frustrate access from outside (see paragraph 2.27).2.35 An audible intruder alarm to BS EN 50131 protecting either the whole of the premises or those parts of the premises where the guns are stored. Consideration should be given to any alarm being installed being a monitored system.Integral Garage Security2.36 Such a garage should have all its external walls constructed to the same standard (or better) as those of the external walls of the remainder of the property (e.g. brick, concrete block, stone).2.1 
2.37 The internal adjoining walls, if they are to be used for fixing a cabinet, should be made of brick, stone or concrete block. Thermal block walls do not usually make a secure anchorage point unless specialist fitting methods are used.2.38 The vehicle door of the garage should be to LPS 1175: 7.2, Security Rating 1 or above, or STS 202, BR1, or LPS 2081, SR A. Or additional security products retro-fitted tested to Sold Secure standards.2.39 On 'up and over' doors as per 2.38. .2.40 Any other doors allowing access from the outside should be constructed to the same specification as the main entry door for a dwelling. Such doors should be secured by locks of a similar standard to BS3621- 2016, or a combination of locks or other supplementary devices to ensure that the door offers maximum locking effect into its frame.2.41 Any opening windows should be fitted with additional locks to bring them to the standards covered in PAS 24 (2016) or the most up to date version of that standard. Dependent upon the vulnerability of these to attack, consideration may need to be given to fitting grilles or bars.2.42 When firearms are stored in such a garage, and the premises are alarmed, that alarm should include the garage.2.43 Ideally, the firearms cabinet should be located as far as possible from the garage vehicle door.2.44 The cabinet should be obscured from open view, preferably by enclosure in an unobtrusive screening device (e.g. a chest, locker etc.).2.45 The certificate holder should be advised to access the cabinet only when the outer doors are closed.Ammunition2.46 Ammunition for section 1 firearms must be kept secure. As a matter of best practice it should be stored in its own individual secure storage, e.g. an integral, lockable compartment within a gun cabinet. Although secure storage of shotgun cartridges is not a requirement of the Firearms Acts, it is sensible to recommend that they should be locked away for both security and safety, especially where there are children in the house.2.47 Although ammunition is not a serious fire hazard, it is advisable that ammunition containers are not in an area exposed to a risk of fire, nor should they be in the area of an escape route where there is a fire risk.2.48 If there is any doubt on the safety or method of intended storage, the Explosives Liaison Officer may be consulted. This is also recommended in the case where a private certificate holder intends to keep reloading articles such as gunpowder, primers or large quantities of cartridges etc.2.1 
Private Collections of Section 1 and Section 2 Firearms2.49 In the case of private collections, the provisions of this Part of this document should be employed with due regard to the individual circumstances of the collector and the collection. Where the collection includes any section 5 weapons, reference must be made to Part 6, Private Collections and Collections on Public Display.Section 5 Firearms and Other Articles Requiring Section 5 Authority2.50 Where any section 5 firearm is held in a dwelling, the provisions of Level 3 security should be applied.2.51 The alarm system should include personal attack facilities for the safety of the occupants to BS EN 50131 and protected by an intruder alarm to BS4737 3.30:2015 or equivalent and ideally monitored by a NSI monitoring centre with an appropriate response.Exceptions2.52 Where up to two small firearms are held by virtue of section 7(1) of F(A)A1997, Level 2 security should be considered, commensurate with the risk involved.2.53 Note that the security considerations for expanding pistol ammunition held by virtue of F(A)A1997 should be the same as in paragraphs 2.46 to 2.48 above.2.54 Ammunition held as part of a collection should be subject to normal security provisions as in paragraphs 2.46 to 2.47 above.2.55 Shot Pistols possessed for vermin control by virtue of section 4(1) & (2) of F (A) A1997 should normally be considered in similar terms to that found in paragraphs 3.2 and 3.3 below.2.56 Self–Contained Gas Cartridge guns to which section 5(1)(AF) applies should normally be subject to Level 1 security. The precise arrangements are for the police to determine based on the level of risk involved in each case, taking account of factors such as local crime rates and location of the property.2.57 Where a single firearm is possessed as a trophy of war by virtue of section 6 of F (A) A1997, with no ammunition suitable for use with that firearm being kept, a minimum of Level 2 security should be considered, commensurate with the risk involved when small firearms are held.Safe-keeping of keys2.58 Only authorised persons should have access to any of the keys for any cabinet etc. containing firearms and section 1 ammunition. Care needs to be taken in selecting locations for the storage of keys, particularly any spare sets, to avoid them being discovered and improperly used. Consideration could be given to using a key cabinet or secure storage (safe) to store keys and spare keys. In all cases primary and spare should be stored separately.2.1 
PART 3: FIREARMS HELD FOR PROFESSIONAL OR SPECIFIC BUSINESS PURPOSES3.1 It is important to stress that every case should be dealt with on its individual merits – see Part 1 of this Handbook.Slaughtering Instruments3.2 Small firearms which are constructed or adapted as slaughtering instruments capable of firing up to two shots without re-loading, may be kept at dwellings under the same conditions as those applying to general section 1 & 2 firearms.3.3 Where such slaughtering instruments are kept at business premises, the firearms should be in a cabinet to BS7558 (1992) within a part of the premises that is secured to at least Level 2 of that in the dwelling specification. If the premises are unoccupied, a signalling alarm to BS4737 - 3.30:2015 should be considered.Firearms for Humane Killing or Treatment of Animals3.4 Small firearms, as defined by section 5(1)(aba) of FA1968, kept solely for the humane killing of animals under section 3 of F(A)A1997, and adapted to fire no more than two shots without reloading, should be subject to Level 2 or 3, commensurate with the risk involved.Veterinary Use3.5 Firearms designed to discharge missiles containing drugs for the treatment of animals should normally be stored with the drug/missile separate from the firearm.3.6 When stored in dwellings, or in surgeries attached to or containing the dwelling of the veterinary surgeon or resident staff of the practice, the conditions applicable to their classification as either section 1 & 2 or section 5 (modified or unmodified) firearms should be applied.3.7 Where kept in the dwellings of other persons authorised to possess those firearms in paragraph 3.5 above (i.e. zoo and wildlife centres), the conditions applicable to the classification of the particular firearms can be applied.3.8 Where the drugs are subject to any form of security requirement under the Drugs Acts, the provision of a storage unit to comply with that requirement is also acceptable for the missiles.3.9 Where the above firearms are kept at a surgery or other place without a residential attachment, the firearms should be in a cabinet providing security to the level of BS7558 (1992), within a part of the premises secured to the appropriate level of the dwelling specification and a signalling alarm to BS473 3.30:2015 should be considered.Starting Pistols (Small Firearms)3.10 Modified or single shot pistols chambered for their original cartridge should be kept in dwellings secured to Level 2 or above, commensurate with the risk involved.3.1 
3.11 Unmodified pistols (capable of firing more than two shots without re-loading) should be kept in dwellings secured to Level 2 or above, commensurate with the risk involved.3.12 Where such pistols are kept in non-residential locations, e.g. schools, sports facilities etc., the firearms should be in a cabinet providing security to the same level as BS7558 (1992), within a part of the premises secured to the level of the dwelling specification appropriate to their classification and a signalling alarm to BS4737 -3.30:2015 considered, if necessary for the individual circumstances.Auctioneers3.13 Where auctioneers hold firearms in the normal course of their business, they should be secured in either:a) Cabinets built and fitted to BS7558 (1992) or equivalent standard.b) A commercial safe, as detailed in Annex A, orc) A store secured to the provisions of either a gun room or armoury as detailed in Annex A, dependent upon the quantity of firearms normally held there.3.14 Where the premises are non-residential, they should be secured to a standard equal to Level 2, with an alarm to BS4737 3.30:2015.3.15 The premises of auctioneers who specialise in the sale/disposal of firearms should generally have security similar to that of a registered firearms dealer under Part 4 of this Handbook.Warehousemen3.16 The nature of warehouse storage is such that firearms may be deposited with a company in a number of ways. The security of the firearms is therefore conditional on how the articles are received.3.17 Individual firearms should be stored in a secure area or cabinet which is equal to that provided for section 1 and 2 firearms. Consideration should be given to individual locking arrangements, where the owner has either sole or joint access to one key for a secure cabinet with two locks. The other key should remain with the warehouse operator.3.18 Where premises are not continuously manned, the premises, or those parts used for the keeping of firearms should be alarmed to BS4737 3.30:2015.3.19 Where firearms are a part of the contents of a secure transit container, and the company are aware of its contents, arrangements must be made to regularly inspect the container whilst held.3.20 Unless required by any explosives or carriage legislation, containers in storage containing firearms and ammunition should not bear labels or markers etc. identifying their contents.3.21 In the interests of both owner and company, the warehouse employees or others should not normally have access into locked/sealed containers. If this is necessary, there should be a system for recording:3.1 
a) by whom, when and for what reason(s) access to the container has taken place,b) The result of any examination of the state of the contents and the notification made to the owner, or his authorised agent.3.22 Whenever possible, containers with firearms should be located in positions where surveillance is possible by staff working in and around the area or covered by monitored CCTV.3.23 The company must have procedures to ensure that in addition to the owner, the police are advised immediately of any loss or theft of firearms, including any attack on containers known to contain firearms.Carriers3.24 Security considerations applying to carriers are generally contained within Part 7 of this Handbook. Where the carrier is also providing storage or the temporary holding of firearms during the course of delivery, the appropriate recommendations in relation to warehousing may be considered.3.1 
PART 4: FIREARMS DEALERS4.1 Dealers’ security can generally be divided into three areas:a) retail shop premises – displayb) stock-secure storagec) dealers operating from home.4.2 Shop premises, should be substantially built of brick or stone etc., and protected by an intruder alarm to BS4737 3.30:2015 or equivalent and ideally monitored by a NSI monitoring centre with an appropriate response.4.3 External access doors other than those in any shop frontage, should be constructed and installed to the requirements in Annex A, this is dependent upon the type of application.4.4 Main doors in shop frontage may either conform to the above or contain glass panel(s). Glass panels and windows should be protected by internal security grilles as specified in Annex A or by ornamental iron grilles of bar or rod, not less than 10mm diameter or 8mm x 12mm cross section.4.5 The use of grilles or bars may not be required where the premises are fitted with security glazing to comply with EN 356:2000 or the most up to date standard, and installed to BS 5357 2007 or the most up to date standard.4.6 Dependent upon the risk, grilles and bars may be either permanently fixed or removable when the premises are open.4.7 Security shutters to LPS1175 SR 3 or equivalent, may be substituted, as applicable.4.8 Rifles and shotguns on display should be locked in racks either by:a) security cable, orb) welded link heavy duty chain, orc) steel rod or bar not less than 10mm diameter.The above to be secured by either padlocks or other fixed locking system.4.9 Wall mounted or built in glazed display cases within a dealers premises should be:a) locked to prevent access without supervision;b) if fitted with ordinary glazing, have retaining devices for the firearms contained to frustrate smash and grab style attacks.a) 
4.10 Section 5 small firearms when stored, must be kept in a locked cabinet or safe to an equivalent to BS7558 (1992).4.11 Any display case for section 5 small firearms must provide security equal to BS7558 and the glazing should be to EN 356:2000 or the most up to date version.4.12 Storage for firearms not on display should be either by:a) Cabinet(s) constructed and fitted to the minimum of BS7558 (1992); orb) Gun room or armoury to the requirements in Annex A, dependent upon the volume of stock within the business, and the level of risk involved.4.13 Section 1 ammunition must be stored in suitably secure manner as per Part 2 of this manual above. Separate from firearms. This could be provided by a separately secure cabinet or a weldmesh/expanded metal security cage with separate locking, located within an existing protected area.4.14 Propellants and powders, particularly gunpowder, must be kept in accordance with the requirements for the level of storage registered or licensed for the premises under the provisions of the relevant Explosives Act and Regulations. The Explosives Liaison Officer must be consulted when specifying security for this part of the premises.4.15 CCTV is expected for shop fronted dealers for both the prevention and detection of crime. In addition to this, there are a range of options that might be considered to identify persons wishing to gain access, such as doors within view of windows, 360 degree door viewers, or an access control system.Dealers Operating from Dwellings4.16 The arrangements at the dwelling should normally provide for the business to be carried out in a part of the premises which is either wholly or partly set aside for that purpose.4.17 In order to identify persons wishing to gain access, doors should either be within view from the windows or be provided with a 360 degree door viewer, CCTV or Access Control solution.4.18 If possible, entry for business purposes should be separate from the normal domestic entry.4.19 Where the premises do not have a wholly adapted part for the business, including storage of stock, provisions should be made to prevent, so far as is reasonably practicable:a) customers being able to view the route to, or location of, the storage for firearms;b) customers being allowed to accompany the dealer or employee to the location of the storage area.4.20 For the safety and security of the dealer and other occupants of the premises, personal attack buttons or remote devices should be considered within the alarm system requirements.4.1 
4.21 Where the property is within its own grounds, lighting should be considered to aid both the detection of approach and the identification of any person(s), as well as for the protection of the occupants entering and leaving. This must complement CCTV systems. Please refer to Lighting against Crime manual.4.22 Where a line monitored alarm system is not employed, telephone lines should be sited to enter the premises above attack height from the ground or any adjoining building.4.23 The applicant should be advised to consider the requirements of planning regulations before adapting domestic premises, e.g. change of use, structural alterations requiring planning, building regulations consent, etc.Dealers Operating Under Section 5 Authority4.24 Where a dealer holds a section 5 authority subject to any specific security requirement, the following should be applied, as appropriate:a) if the dealer's display area or gun room also holds non-section 5 firearms, then the section 5 articles must be secured separately in cabinets to at least BS7558 (1992) to prevent access by those without section 5 authority;b) section 5 items should not be on display in the sales area or other part of the premises nor should they be visible to the public;c) the section 5 items must at all times be kept locked in the armoury, gun room or cabinet as applicable, other than when access is required to them;d) the intruder alarm should be a monitored system to BS4737 3.30:2015.4.25 Where the authority permits the dealer to hold considerable stocks of articles under sections 5(1)(a), (ab), (aba), (ac), (ad) or any large quantity under 5(1)(b), or military/ordnance articles under that section, the following should be considered, as appropriate:a) 	vehicle access – the premises should wherever possible be designed so that no external door has to remain open to allow the delivery or collection of section 5 items. Ideally, it should be that a securable area in front of the delivery door is entered and then secured before entry is allowed into the main building. This will prevent unauthorised or criminal entry into the premises whilst staff are working.b) 	where necessary for the security of the types/quantities of section 5 items on the premises, the intruder alarm should be linked to a CCTV system that can be monitored at all times by remote signalling at the alarm monitoring station and during operating hours by the staff on site. Cameras should be located to view all access to the premises, the internal area and armoury, and other areas at risk not otherwise visible to staff.c) 	Intruder alarm system should be installed to BS EN 50131-2-2:2017 this covers Alarm systems. Intrusion and hold-up systems. Intrusion detectors. Passive infrared detectors.a) 
PART 5: HOME OFFICE APPROVED RIFLE & MUZZLE LOADING PISTOL CLUBS, AND CADET CORPS5.1 Non-residential club premises where firearms are stored should have secure storage that is commensurate with the number of firearms the club will hold. The standard should equate to at least the appropriate level expected for domestic property. This level of security should depend on the individual risk factors.5.2 Where there is residential occupation, account must be taken of the security and safety of the residents in formulating the appropriate level of protection.5.3 In considering the storage volume, it is important to establish the maximum number of firearms owned by the club and/or those of members that are kept there either permanently, or in temporary storage. This should include, for example, those firearms normally held by members at home, but lodged at the club premises during a holiday.5.4 A gun room should be established within non-residential clubhouses, or a stand-alone unit such as an armoury may be considered. Details for this provision are in Annex A.5.5 A gun room should be within a building of substantial construction, e.g. brick, concrete etc. If the clubhouse is of other construction, e.g. timber etc., then the provision of a structure to armoury specification, as detailed in Annex A, could be considered.5.6 Provision may be made for the separate securing of members’ firearms within the gun room/armoury if appropriate. It should be made clear to each individual certificate holder that they are responsible for the security of their own firearms, and that this responsibility cannot be delegated to the club.5.7 The above may be met by the provision of locked cabinets or racks, or of an armourer issue system.Cadet Force Premises5.8 The Ministry of Defence controls Cadet Force and Combined Cadet Force premises. The security for single Cadet Force units is the responsibility of the appropriate Service’s (Army, Royal Air Force or Royal Navy) Security Unit in accordance with the Joint Services Publication 440, The Defence Manual of Security – JSP 440 (DMS). For the information of Firearms Enquiry Officers (FEOs), a summary of the relevant parts of the manual is in the ACPO/MOD restricted circular.5.9 The application of security measures in respect of the storage of firearms, subject to the requirements of the Firearms Acts, on such premises should be taken up with the appropriate department. Details are in the ACPO/MOD restricted circular.5.10 FEO’s visiting Cadet Force premises should normally view the MOD Inspection Certificate as satisfactory proof of security. Any queries in relation to the security provisions should be directed to the security unit issuing the Inspection Certificate.5.11 Only those privately owned rifles necessary to meet or supplement the cadet forces training requirements are permitted to be stored. Details are in the ACPO/MOD restricted circular.5.1 
PART 6: FIREARMS HELD UNDER MUSEUMS LICENCE/PRIVATE COLLECTIONSMuseums & Galleries6.1 The security of firearms in any museum must be a combination of elements directly related to the firearms and the building in which they are to be kept and/or displayed. With his widespread experience of museums’ security and extensive records on many of the UK’s museums, the Museums Security Adviser at Resource (formerly the Museums & Galleries Commission) is always available for consultation. Where extensive collections are involved it will usually be possible to arrange a personal visit by the Resource Security Adviser if required.6.2 For further information about Resource and the Museums Weapons Group, contact:ResourceThe Council for Museums, Archives and Libraries 16 Queen Anne’s GateLondon SW1H 9AA Telephone 020 7273 1444 Principles6.3 Whenever handguns, automatic or semi-automatic hand-held firearms (section 5) are involved special consideration needs to be given to security provision as these types of firearms can attract those who would wish to acquire them for criminal purposes.6.4 In many respects these guidelines are similar to those necessary to protect other valuable artefacts kept in museums.6.5 Recommendations for physical protection that can either defeat an attack or at the very least delay the criminal sufficiently to enable the police to respond accords with the “onion” principle of security that makes provision for a number of intervening layers. These layers along with other security devices form part of an equation that provides for effective security in depth.6.6 At the same time this security equation has to be flexible if it is to meet the security requirements arising from the need for museums to be open to the public. In addition, circumstances may inhibit the quality of some of the elements that will dictate compensation elsewhere in the equation.6.7 Security provision for ammunition must be similar to that for firearms and the two are to be stored separately.6.8 The very nature and scale of the collection must be taken into account in determining the extent of defensive measures.6.1 
Perimeter Security6.9 In a minority of cases museums may benefit from some form of perimeter security in the form of walls or fences. Although it is difficult to provide totally effective perimeter defences, full advantage should be taken if any are available but making certain that a provision for vision from outside the perimeter exists and that gates are properly secured.Lighting6.10 The use of security lighting can be a very cost effective deterrent. Use of Dusk until Dawn lighting might be considered.Physical Security6.11 Wherever firearms are to be kept the shell of the host building and its apertures will need to have good attack resisting qualities. However, where listing for architectural merit, aesthetics or other reasons mitigates against the unfettered use of robust physical security measures, they may have to be modified and/or limited to a defined area within the building.6.12 If firearms are to be stored (see below) or displayed in areas that feature an external wall at ground level or where there is some form of platform to mount an attack, very careful consideration will need to be given to the qualities of that wall as well as any apertures. Taking account of the level of threat arising from the issues identified about the quality of the wall required might range from cement mortar brickwork through to reinforced poured concrete or other specialist materials.6.13 Wherever possible the criminal’s progress through the building to the firearms should be impeded as much as possible by locked doors or other means.6.14 The area(s) where firearms are to be displayed may need to be separately secured according to the perceived level of threat.Stores6.15 Museum stores often contain concentrations of material which dictate greater protection arrangements than might be appropriate elsewhere in the building. This principle is equally applicable to firearms. Therefore arrangements are needed that provide for the store to be kept in a separate secure alarmed state even when other parts of the building are in use.6.16 Attention will have to be paid to the strength of the walls, ceiling and floor although it would be right to take account of the benefits gained from the intervening layers of the “onion”. If the store features an external wall, close attention will need to be paid to the construction. Although its replacement may not be practicable there are ways of giving it considerable additional strength.6.17 Consideration must always be given to bricking up or otherwise boarding over window apertures with substantial materials which will very often find favour as it may improve the environmental factors.6.18 The doors together with their frames must be of security quality but again scale will come into this with large collections in unattended buildings having strong room quality doors and gates. It can be expected as6.1 
a minimum for the door to feature mortice locking at one third and two third levels, with matching hinge bolts.6.19 As with the domestic situation, a small collection of firearms housed in a store that has only limited attack resisting qualities can be compensated for by the use of cabinets that conform to BS7558. In the case of extensive collections the provision of secure racking will depend on the quality of other physical elements of the equation (e.g. doors) and the nature of the use of the area in which they are housed (e.g. presence of unlicensed staff).Intruder Detection System6.20 The museum will need to have an intruder detection system that conforms to BS4737 and connects to an alarm-receiving centre over monitored line (e.g. BT Redcare) which will provide for a police response. Some museums have 24/7 security staff and protected control rooms, and where appropriate, these will deal with incidents and notify the police as necessary.Although trap protection will necessarily feature, the system needs to provide for the monitoring of the shell of the building in support of its physical security features in order that there might be the earliest notification of attack.6.21 Whenever firearms are present, either on display or in store, staff need to have immediate access to some means of communications (encrypted radios/personal attack devices) linked to the intruder detection system or to a 24/7 control room facility.6.22 Chief Officers may wish to have contingency arrangements for the response to museums housing firearms featuring high priority and armed response units. Where such arrangements are made, to minimise the potential for false alarms it should normally be required that alarm systems include verification.Automatic Fire Detection System6.23 The museum will need to have a fire detection system connected in a similar manner to the intruder detection system.Manned Guarding6.24 An out of hours security presence can provide for an efficient monitoring of the site but those involved must not have the direct means of entering any stores or areas where large collections are stored. In some circumstances it may be necessary for security guards however to have access to areas where firearms are in display conditions.6.25 Night guarding will often mean that an extensive collection of firearms is housed in the museum, in which case it is particularly important that the guard(s) have the means of monitoring the building by intruder detection devices and CCTV as appropriate.Closed Circuit Television (CCTV)6.26 Resource does not see CCTV as a panacea to the threat of crime as perceived by some others, but it does recognise that it can be a valuable aid especially in support of invigilation when the museum is open to the public as an element in a basket of security measures. To be effective in post-incident investigation6.1 
it needs to feature multiplex recording where a number of cameras are in use and pictures produced need to be of evidential quality.6.27 Security for firearms not on display will be in accordance with the level appropriate to the type and number of the firearms involved. Standards should be not less than that expected for the security for registered firearms dealers or Home Office approved clubs.Exhibiting of Firearms etc.6.28 There will be occasions when museums will seek to display large firearms that cannot be easily carried. In such cases, the museum should be required to provide attack resisting security fixings, although obviously the point will come where a firearm cannot be moved without mechanical assistance and its criminal use is highly unlikely.6.29 Small firearms, i.e. rifles, handguns etc., should only be displayed in cases having good attack resisting qualities and are to the requirements of the Security Advisor to Resource as outlined in Annex A.6.30 Display cases holding handguns or similar sized section 5 firearms should not normally be installed in entrance foyer areas or close to exit or other doors from the building.6.31 Display cases should be firmly attached to the fabric of the building with appropriate fixing devices, or secured on substantial frames to prevent their removal6.32 Small arms displays should not normally be located in areas where surveillance either by staff or remote devices, i.e. CCTV is not provided.6.33 All display cases housing firearms should be fitted with alarms, with preference being given to vibration detection in order that there is the earliest notification of attack.6.34 Where possible any display of firearms should be displayed within the areas furthest from the entrances, points of access such as window skylights.Invigilation6.35 Display cases containing firearms are to be the subject of, at the very least, frequent attention by patrolling attendants, but ideally by someone having direct line of sight.Keys6.36 Security arrangements should include a system for ensuring the safe custody of keys, both to display cabinets and the building. As a rule only keys sufficient to enter should be taken from the premises.6.37 Internal keys need to be in a key safe or cabinet that is out of general view and in a secure area.6.38 Keys are to be only issued to authorised persons and trusted and vetted partners. .6.1 
Private Collections and Collections on Public Display6.39 The security of premises housing private collections of or including section 5 firearms must be not less than that required for other firearms of similar type and quantity. This is also relevant to section 7(1) firearms.6.40 Where individual collections containing a number of firearms under section 7(1) or trophies of war are kept in domestic premises, they should be secured to the standard applicable at Level 3.6.41 If the collection is kept on other premises and exhibited to the public on those premises the appropriate requirements of museums & galleries must be considered.6.42 When not on display collections should be secured in cabinets which are either manufactured and installed to BS7558 -1992, or provide equal or better security.6.43 Any display cases for such collections should be equal to the resistance offered by cabinets to BS7558 with glazing to BS EN 356:2000 General requirements are contained in Annex A.6.44 Display cases whose glazing does not conform to the above should only be considered where arrangements exist to close the glazed area with a steel door/cover which provide appropriate locking, or internal security which prevents the firearms removal within the limits expected from a BS7558 - 1992 cabinet.6.45 Where collections are to be exhibited at venues, secure display cases as provided in Annex A should be fully closed and locked. Where possible they should be anchored to bases or tables to prevent easy removal.6.46 Display cases should not normally have tops with lifting glazed panels unless the firearms are secured to the case with restraints or key operated toggles.6.47 Firearms display cases must be under surveillance from CCTV or member of staff.6.48 Where collections are to be displayed for a number of days and not returned overnight to their normal place of keeping, the exhibitors must arrange continual supervision of the articles, if they are kept on premises which do not have security applicable to their usual storage.6.49 When presentations etc. are part of the exhibition, firearms should not be on unsecured display unless:a) the firearms are in the possession of the person delivering the presentation and/or an authorised assistant;b) the audience is arranged so that no person may gain access to the firearm(s) subject of a presentation; andc) arrangements are provided that allow for the return of the firearm being used to a secured exhibition container or safe at the conclusion of its use in the presentation.a) 
Conditions on movement & display of section 7(1) firearms6.50 An exhibition of firearms held under this section may only take place with the permission of the chief officer of the police of that area.6.51 The organiser of such an exhibition must be a person with proven experience of handling and security of firearms (e.g. a registered firearms dealer).6.52 Permission for such an exhibition will be subject to a satisfactory risk assessment of the proposed venue by a person nominated by the chief officer of police.6.53 Excluding events open to the public, a list of all persons attending the exhibition must be provided to the chief officer of police seven days prior to the event.Conditions for sites designated under section 7(3) (Historic handguns)6.54 The security of the site must be of a standard agreed by the Home Office in consultation with the chief officer of police of the area concerned, and must be comparable to the security required for the storage of substantial numbers of prohibited firearms under an authority from the Secretary of State under section 5 FA1968.6.55 The security of the site shall be sufficient to prevent the unauthorised access to the site and removal by the owner or by any other person of any firearms and ammunition stored on the site.6.56 In particular, where any part of the site is to be used under section 7(3), security measures must be sufficient to prevent unauthorised access to firearms subject to section 7(3).6.57 The site authorities must provide adequate storage facilities for the preservation of the firearms concerned, and take all reasonable steps and exercise all due diligence to prevent damage to the guns.6.58 The site authorities must provide adequate facilities for the firearms concerned to be shot, maintained and studied by their owners.6.59 The facilities and arrangements at the site must be approved by the appropriate local licensing authority and fire authority as appropriate for the storage of explosives and for the safety of those present on the site.6.60 If members of the public are to be admitted to any part of the site to attend displays or exhibitions, then security arrangements must be such that members of the public cannot gain access to firearms or ammunition.6.1 
PART 7: FIREARMS AND AMMUNITION IN TRANSITCarriage by Road – Section 1 & 2 Firearms & AmmunitionPrivate Individuals7.1 When carrying firearms etc. in a vehicle, the following steps are considered to accord with the duty to ensure the safe custody of the items.Vehicles Left Unattended7.2 Whenever possible, the vehicle should not be left unattended for long periods.7.3 Vehicles containing firearms and left unattended for any length of time should ideally have an immobiliser and/or alarm fitted. For commercial vehicles, such as vans additional locking solutions should be fitted to manufacturer’s standards. Trackers should be considered by those individuals who regularly move large numbers of guns.7.4 Where possible, they should be parked in an area that provides natural surveillance7.5 For preference, the firearms should be stored in the locked boot or other secured load carrying area of the vehicle. They should be out of sight from passers-by.7.6 In the case of estates, hatchbacks and similar vehicles, the certificate holder should ensure that:a) where fitted, the lid or cover of the load carrying area should be in place, or the firearms are covered and concealed to prevent their identification;b) if the vehicle is to be left unattended for any length of time, the firearm and ammunition should not be stored together;c) where the boot or load carrying area is the most practical place, ammunition should be secured in an appropriate container ideally, but not necessarily, secured to the vehicle;d) where it is practical, the bolt magazine or other operating part should be separated from the firearm and either carried on the person, or kept in a locked container, ideally secured to the vehicle, or concealed elsewhere.7.7 Where firearms and ammunition are being carried on a journey which involves their being kept away from their usual secure storage, the certificate holder should make arrangements to ensure that they are, so far as is possible, secure. Considerations when firearms are being taken to venues involving overnight or longer accommodation include:a) obtaining accommodation that already provides secure facilities;b) separating and retaining possession of integral parts of the firearm, e.g. the fore-end of a shotgun, bolt of a rifle etc.;a) 
c) Utilising portable security devices, i.e. security cords etc.Commercially7.8 If not personally transferred, section 1 firearms and ammunition and section 2 firearms should be consigned for carriage with a reputable carrier.7.9 Where the operations or journey require re-direction between depots, especially when different vehicles are used, the carrier should operate a system that provides a method of back tracking items in transit.7.10 The consignor should have a verifiable proof of despatch from the carrier and a recorded proof of final delivery.7.13 Consignment/delivery confirmation should be by signature of the respective consignor and consignee or their servant/employee.7.14 Firearms must not be delivered to or left with any third party who is not authorised to be in possession of such firearms.7.15 The items should be detailed on the consignment note, which should travel with the consignment.7.16 The packaging should not readily identify the contents, unless required by any Hazardous Goods or Explosives transportation regulations.7.17 Any parcel lost in transit must be reported to the police as soon as the discovery is made.7.18 Any carrier who regularly, as a general part of his business, takes on transportation of firearms should ensure, so far as is possible that the vehicle(s) used for that purpose is of a type offering secure stowage of the goods in transit.7.19 Carriers which have depots where firearms are kept between different stages of their transportation should have secure facilities similar to those that are applicable to warehousemen.Section 5 Firearms and/or Ammunition - Commercial Carriage by Road7.20 Carriers of prohibited weapons, component parts and ammunition are required to take all reasonable precautions for the safe custody of the articles in their possession.7.21 Vehicles carrying prohibited weapons, component parts and ammunition must have these articles either:a) secured out of sight in the load carrying area; orb) Within the secure area of the vehicle.7.22 These areas must be secured with high security locks, padlocks of not less than level 4 of CEN 12320:1997 (commonly referred to as CEN 4 or 5), or other tested deadlocks.7.13 
7.23 Where, due to the size/shape of the prohibited weapons, it is impractical to move them in a closed vehicle they must be carried securely fastened down on open vehicles and covered to obscure them as far as possible.7.24 The load carrying area of car derived vans and other goods carrying vehicles must be separated from the driver’s compartment.7.25 The vehicle must not be left unattended at any time when weapons, components or ammunition are carried except:a) within a site licensed under explosives legislation, or exempt under the Explosives Acts (Exemption) Regulations 1979;b) within an area under control of the Ministry of Defence; orc) within premises authorised by the Secretary of State for the storage of that quantity of prohibited firearms or ammunition.7.26 The vehicle should be equipped with a two-way communication system or vehicle tracking system.7.27 If neither is viable due to the length of journey or terrain, the vehicle should be capable of being immobilised from inside the driver’s compartment.7.28 If explosives are being carried, then the necessary warning symbols should be displayed. Otherwise there should be no external indications of the contents of the vehicle.7.29 The vehicle must always be double manned, save for the provisions covering small loads and particular articles specified in paragraph 7.37.7.30 A sign must be carried indicating:a) that the occupant(s) will not open the doors for anyone and if necessary, will follow a police car to the nearest police station; andb) the police telephone contact number for use in the event of any incident involving the vehicle.7.31 The vehicle will only make dedicated journeys with no unnecessary stops or delays.7.32 When regular collections/deliveries have to be made, times and routes should be varied as often as possible.7.33 When weapons are being loaded/unloaded this should be carried out discretely and whenever possible in secure conditions. When this is not possible, weapons must be boxed or covered to conceal their contents.7.34 When large consignments are being carried, consideration should be given to informing police who may be able to assist in facilitating a safe route and/or delivery or collection point.7.13 
7.35 The dispatcher must inform the receiver of the expected time of arrival and having checked the bona fides of the recipient, advise the vehicle crew of those details.7.36 The vehicle crew must ensure the bona fides of the person accepting delivery.7.37 The consignment must be accompanied by documentation to validate the cargo and its journey and the transfer from consignor to carrier and from carrier to consignee must be in person and against signature confirming receipt.7.38 When fewer than 6 section 5 weapons, or prohibited expanding pistol ammunition in no more than 20 cases/boxes/cartons containing no more than 10,000 rounds per unit, or the component parts of prohibited weapons (not capable of being assembled into a working firearm) are carried, the following will apply on low-risk journeys:ï Although double staffing is regarded as safest, the items may be carried in a vehicle which is single staffed.7.39 In the case of single crewed vehicles, the carrier must ensure that:a) The journey can be properly accomplished within the limits which may apply to the permitted work hours for a single driver; orb) The consignment must be kept between any work periods in a location which provides suitable security for the consignment, or the consignment and vehicle carrying it.7.40 Carriers may use goods carrying vehicles which, in order to carry handguns and component parts have either:a) a steel security container permanently attached to the vehicle’s bodywork; orb) 	a commercially manufactured lock on/lock off steel security container, which may have a common securing plate in a number of vehicles.7.41 All prohibited ammunition must be secured out of sight in the load carrying area of the vehicle.7.42 The vehicle must not be left unattended when firearms and/or ammunition are being carried. When this is unavoidable, the vehicle should be properly locked with the alarm set and immobilised.7.43 When moving section 5 items, commercial or Heavy Goods Vehicles should display an orange 12’’ diameter disc clearly on the upper surface of the vehicle to enable identification from the air in the event of an emergency.Section 5 for Professional Purposes7.44 Where vehicles in which section 5 firearms are carried for professional use, e.g. vets, are not fitted with immobilisers or alarms, then aftermarket systems should be fitted should be fitted.7.13 
7.45 Firearms should always be stored in the locked boot or other secured, preferably unglazed, load carrying area of the vehicle.7.46 The firearm and ammunition should not be stored together. Where the boot or load carrying area is the most practical place, ammunition should be locked in an appropriate container, secured to the vehicle.7.47 If a handgun, it should be kept in a locked container secured to the vehicle.7.48 Provision should be made for the securing of other firearms to the vehicles structure, e.g. security case, cage, cable or clamp.For Display Purposes7.49 Collections of firearms being transported for display or exhibition should be carried in accordance with conditions (given above) which are applicable to the class of weapon being carried.7.50 Where articles are being transported within display cases, the vehicles selected should allow for all cases to be within the closed luggage or goods area of the vehicle.7.51 Where the vehicle has windows into the load carrying area, the cases should be covered to prevent identification of the contents.7.52 Whilst loading/unloading, the vehicle must either be continuously attended or be secured between each operation.The Carriage of Dangerous Goods and Use of Transportable Pressure Equipment Regulations7.53 When transporting ammunition and propellants, care should be taken to ensure that the limits applicable to the class of vehicle being used comply with the permitted amounts in the Regulations. Guidance for commercial carriage can be found in the above Regulations and the current edition of the international carriage regulations, ADR. For the individual carrying the limited quantities permitted for their own use, a summary of the safe and secure carriage requirements published by the Health and Safety Executive can be found in Annex B.7.13 
ANNEX ASECURITY: GENERAL CONSTRUCTION & STANDARDS1. These specifications are a guide to the types of construction which provide a good standard of security and do not exclude other methods which would afford a similar standard. The security required should be reasonable for the individual situation, but these specifications should provide a standard against which to measure any alternative proposals.2. Certain recommendations in this section involve structural adaptation. You need to ensure that any recommendation you make will not cause any damage to load bearing of floors or walls. It is important that applicants are advised professional advice should be sought before embarking on projects of this nature.3. When proposing security for domestic and commercial premises, no requirements can be implemented that compromise the provisions for safe exiting from such premises, required in both the Building and Fire Safety controls.4. Any proposals involving increasing levels of resistance by security devices should take account of the fact that steel doors are likely to be found inappropriate within a normal domestic situation, but may be relevant to areas such as cellars, where substantial anchorage may be present.5. The style of security required must be reasonable for each situation.Illustrations6. The illustrations provided with this document are not necessarily to scale, but are produced to give visual information on the items to which they relate.Cabinets7.1 Cabinets which may be considered to be suitable for the security of firearms, shotguns and ammunition should be expected to provide the resistance equal to:a) a cabinet manufactured and fitted as certified to comply with BS7558:1992; orb) a cabinet fabricated to the following:i. Sheet steel body of not less than 2mm (14swg), formed by either folding, continuous welding or a combination of these methods;ï when fabricating the body, the door case should be constructed to provide a continuous rest plate the length of the opening edge to prevent attack on the lockbolts by inserting a hacksaw blade;ï the door frame may be formed by return bending of the body steel or the provision of a bar or angle frame, welded to the carcass with sufficient relief to the edges to provide for door locking and hanging. The frame should be designed so that the door, when closed, can resist attempts to force it inwards.ï 
ï doors should be formed from the same material with either bent, folded or post formed edges, or the provision of a bracing frame of bar or angled steel, or ribs welded to the inside of the door to prevent the flexing or bending of the door when closed;ï hinges internally fitted;ï hinges externally fitted, with either hinge bolts, anti-bar plates or interlocking formed door edge, along the hanging side of the door;ï swivel bars or rods with return fold anti-bar plate. The frame should be fabricated to prevent, so far as possible, the insertion of tools to cut the pins; orï for slot in type doors, not less than 2 steel pins of 12mm diameter or full width welded steel foot plate not less than door thickness.ii. Secured by:ï locks to BS3621 – 2017 or 7 lever safe locks with not less than 38mm x 9mm cross section steel bolts; orï padlocks not less than CEN 4. Close shackle padlocks should be selected on open ring or plate staples.Locks specified above, with the exception of padlocks, should be mounted on steel brackets or pockets, providing strength equal to that of the door and welded to the door.8. Hinged full-length doors for rifles/shotguns, should be fitted with two locking devices fitted at points to divide the locking edge into equal parts. Alternatively, the door may have a driven bolt/multi-point locking system, either key or lever operated, providing:a) three bolts operating equally along the opening edge or opening edge, top and bottom;b) the bolts to provide resistance equal to that in BS3621-2017;c) a lever driven system to be secured by a lock to BS3621- 2017 or equivalent.9. On slide-in, fully braced doors, the number and location of the lock(s) will be determined by the degree of absence of flexing in the door.10. Padlocks should have steel staples, hasp/staple, or pad bars fabricated to equate to the protective strength of the lock.11. Provision of at least 4 fixing holes to take not less than 10mm diameter fastening devices. The holes to be spaced to provide maximum binding of cabinet to structure.8. 
12. When ammunition or firing mechanisms are to be kept separately from the firearms, a smaller cabinet of similar construction or a separately lockable container, either as an extension of the cabinet, or internally fabricated, can be manufactured.Safes13. Assuming they are physically capable of containing a firearm, commercially manufactured safes may be considered suitable for the securing of firearms. Even early models, if tight and in good condition, can provide physical protection that would be above that expected on a cabinet constructed to BS7558 - 1992. The following considerations should be applied as appropriate.14. Safes weighing less than 20cwts should be secured in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions, or in the case of one already possessed, that from a manufacturer or safe engineer.15. Safes have a considerable floor loading implication. Advice must be sought for any proposal to fit a safe other than on a solid ground floor.16. To protect those safes with thinner plate backs, they must always be installed with the back against a solid wall or be built into a wall or recess to prevent attack at the rear.17. Where the safe is secured by driven bolt work, a single key lock or dial lock (either combination or digital) is often provided. Unless there is some particular requirement, double locking is not necessary.Display Cabinets18. Cabinets which may be considered to be suitable for the display of firearms, shotguns and ammunition should be expected to provide resistance equal to:a) a cabinet manufactured and fitted as certified to comply with BS7558:1992 with laminated glazing to EN 356:2000 (with a minimum thickness of 11.3mm)b) a cabinet certified to Loss Prevention Standard LPS1175, Level 4.19. Cabinets which can be expected to provide these standards are most likely to be constructed by:a) cabinet case manufactured from not less than 2mm (14swg) steel, formed by either folding, continuous welding or a combination of these methods with either post formed, welded angle or box section front frame; orb) 60mm x 60mm x 4mm thick mild steel angle forming all edges, top back & sides with 2mm steel infill panels with box section front frame, all edges, joints and mitres, welded;c) steel box section door (e.g. 40mm x 40mm in a 1500mm x 650mm door) with post formed flange or continuously welded external steel bar beading of 20mm;d) locking side to have either post formed or a continuous seam welded overlap plate to prevent insertion of tools between door and frame along that edge;a) 
e) door to be hung on good quality steel hinges with captive pins and secured with engineers screws;f) a minimum of two hinge bolts of not less than 12mm diameter, welded and mounted to pass through the section of the door case, located to provide maximum retention on the hanging side should an attack on the hinges succeed;g) glazing secured into door by solid steel internal beading/flanges (30mm x 15mm as in c above) screwed into section with 6mm diameter countersunk engineers screws at 50mm centres;h) laminated glass panel to BS EN 356:2000 15mm in above case);i) locks should be mounted in cabinet frame and not in the door. Door to be slotted to receive lockbolt only;j) fitted with two locks giving physical resistance to a level expected in BS7558-1992.20. Where small firearms or concealed firearms are displayed, separate devices/fixtures should be fitted to secure the exhibit(s) to the body of the cabinet.Clamps21. Clamps which may be considered to be suitable for the security of a single firearm or shotgun should be:a) steel plate construction, not less than 2mm (14swg), all external joints to be seam welded or of bend construction;b) secured by a lock to BS3621- 2017; 7 lever safe locks with not less that 38mm x 9mm cross section bolts; a lock on the HELA Tech doc 26/95; security padlocks not less than CEN 4;c) configured to enclose weapon action and trigger(s);d) provided with at least two fixing points to allow fixing devices not less than 10mm diameter being used.Cable Locks22. Flexible or semi-rigid devices for the secure fastening of single weapons which provide the restraint equal to:a) spun steel security cables, not less than 8 mm diameter excluding any sleeve;b) fitted with integral anchorage plate suitable for fastening with non-return security fixings;c) secured by a close fitting padlock not less than CEN 3 up to CEN 4 or in-built security locking device.a) 
Gun Enclosure23. The adaptation of an existing enclosure within the fabric of a building which may be considered to be suitable for the security of the firearms, shotguns and ammunition where:a) the enclosure is not to be formed by any walls being of timber and/or plasterboard construction (studded wall) unless the area has been rendered secure to standards similar to the recommendations in paragraph 29 below;b) the door fitted is constructed either as:i) a security class, laminated or solid timber core door of not less than 44mm thickness; or orii) a timber door lined with sheet steel not less than 16swg, the sheet to be folded round the locking edge of the door and secured to the door structure with non-return screws or dome head bolts if externally lined, or steel screws if internally lined. The fixings to be not more than 125mm apart.24. Hung on good quality hinges. A minimum of two in the case of half height and three if a full height door is fitted.25. If the door is outward opening, hinge bolts must be fitted sufficient to retain the door in the event of an attack on the exposed hinge pins.26. To be secured by:a) two mortice locks to at least BS3621 – 2017 or its equivalent;b) two lock’s from the HELA Tech doc 26/5;c) driven bolt/multi point locking system, either key or lever operated, providing:i) three bolts operating equally along the opening edge or opening edge, top and bottom;ii) the bolts to provide resistance equal to that in BS3621-2017;iii) lever driven system to be secured by a lock to BS3621-201727. Long plate lock boxes, or a 1.6mm (16swg) thick bolt protection strip to be fitted to the frame on the opening side.28. If the ceiling of the enclosure is accessible from a vulnerable area, e.g. a loft, its security should be enhanced by the fitting of an expanded metal mesh, not less than 4mm (8swg) or equivalent. The mesh/grill section size to prevent any of the contents being removed. Secured to the walls of the enclosure or if an alarm is fitted, protected by a device for detecting an attack on the mesh.8. 
Gun Room29. The adaptation of an existing room within a building which may be considered to be suitable for the security of the firearms, shotguns and ammunition where the enclosure does not have any walls of timber and plasterboard construction (studded wall) unless the area has been rendered secure by:a) the fitting of expanded metal mesh, not less that 4mm (8swg) or not greater than 30mm by 50mm section, secured to the studding at not more than 300mm centres by suitable screw fastenings; andb) if the wall may be subject to sustained attack, consideration should be given to tying the mesh to adjoining walls, floor and ceiling, or mounting in a frame secured to these areas.30. The room is accessed by an internal door within the building, or door within a protected area.31. The door should be, according to risk and location, either:a) a solid core timber barricade or laminated security door of not less than 44mm thickness;b) a timber door lined with sheet steel not less than 16swg, the sheet to be folded round the locking and hanging edge of the door. It should be secured to the door structure with steel screws, non- return on the external surface. The fixings to be not more than 125mm centres.c) a door to Loss Prevention Board Standard LPS 1175, Security Rating 4; ord) a sheet steel door (subject to constructional strength of walls) of either:i) 10mm minimum thickness sheet steel door; orii) 6mm minimum thickness sheet steel door, stiffened by the provision of a 50mm by 50mm by 6mm steel angle or channel welded as close as possible to the four edges of the door, allowing a minimum of 20mm of the door edges overlay onto the angle of the frame on an outward opening door. The stiffening to be continuous.32. Solid timber, security class and steel lined doors must be fitted with good quality steel hinges. At least three to provide the necessary support.33. Doors of sheet steel fabrication will need to be:a) hung on robust steel hinges continuously welded to the door and door surround. Hinges may be either externally or internally fitted. Doors over 1.5 metres in height should be fitted with not less than 3 hinges.b) where external hinges are chosen, hinge bolts must be fitted to prevent the door being opened on the hinge side if the hinges have been destroyed/removed. The hinge bolts of not less than 40mm by 20mm cross section must be continuously welded to the inner surface on the hanging side of the door. The hinge bolts should fit snugly against the door surround, passing at least 20mm behind the surround.a) 
c) hinge bolts should be fitted to support each hinge provided on the door and in the case of only two being required, they must be positioned either at or above the level of the upper hinge, and at or below the lower hinge on the door;d) when a 6mm door pattern is chosen, steel lock pockets must be fitted so that the edge of the angle is not cut through, but slotted to receive the lock.e) for inward opening doors, lock bolt receivers fabricated to the standards above must be continuously welded to the surround. They should be constructed to permit only necessary play in the door. Their vertical opening should allow for any flexing/expanding the door may need.34. Solid timber and steel lined doors must be hung in a heavy duty timber frame fitted to the surrounding walls by appropriate fixing devices of not less than 150mm length at no more than 400mm centres with such devices not more than 150mm from the corners.35. Steel door frames for up to 6mm thick steel doors fitted in walls not less than 125mm thick can be fabricated by 100mm x 100mm x 6mm angle, ideally fitted with the fixings inside the room. If this is not possible, the heads must be welded or splayed to prevent removal.36. Steel door surrounds to be fitted in solid or cavity walls not less than 230mm thick, may be fabricated, dependent upon 6mm or 10mm construction of either:a) 100mm by 75mm by 6mm/10mm steel angle with a 100mm by 6mm/10mm plate continuously welded to the "L" to produce a "T" section frame 200mm by 75mm by 6mm/10mm;b) 200mm by 75mm by 6mm/10mm steel "T" section;c) the surround must be secured by rag bolts or similar high strength masonry devices both on the external and internal faces of the "T" section surround. The outer side ones welded or splayed to prevent removal. The fixings should not be greater than 400mm apart, and not more than 150mm from the corners.d) if the door is outward opening, hinge bolts must be fitted sufficient to prevent door failure in the event of an attack on the exposed hinge pins.37. Gun room doors should normally be secured by:a) two mortice locks to at least BS3621-2017 or its equivalent; orb) two locks from the HELA Tech doc 26/5.38. It is acceptable for a door to be secured by a system of driven bolt work which is to the following standard:a) the bolt work can be either lever or key driven.b) the bolts should operate:i) along the opening edge, driving a minimum of 3 bolts, set equally spaced down that edge;i) 
Orii) along opening edge, top and bottom, of the door.c) where the door has no bottom channel or frame, a bolt operating in the lower section of the opening edge of the door to replace that in the preceding paragraph;d) the bolt work may include driven bolts acting as hinge bolts down the hanging side of the door. The number of such driven bolts must be the same as on a door with fixed hinge bolts;e) the bolts must be of good quality steel;f) on solid timber/steel lined doors, the bolt work can either be internally secured to the door or morticed into the door either during construction or at fitting;g) on sheet steel doors the bolts must be installed either:i) in steel pockets constructed from similar material to the door, continuously welded to the door;ii) on a 10mm plate door, in at least 2 steel carriers constructed from 50mm by 10mm steel angle continuously welded to the doorplate.iii) on a 6mm steel door with framing, the outer carrier may be the existing angle with a 6mm reinforcing plate welded continuously to the inner face of the angle and extending at least 25mm above and below the bolt slot top and bottom edges.Where round bolts are fitted, the steel angle should be not less than 60mm on that side through which the bolts pass.h) the bolt work must be secured by a lock to BS3621-2017, engaging into the driving bars. It must effectively detain the whole of the linkage in the locked position when operated. The lock to be fitted in either a steel pocket or carrier welded to the interior of the door;i) in the case of a handle operated locking system, it must be designed so the handle is of a weak construction and cannot be used to place leverage on the mechanism when the door is locked;j) any handles fitted to either timber or steel doors should be of weak construction to prevent their being used in any attack on the door;k) on timber door frames, long plate lock boxes, or a 1.5mm (16swg) thick bolt protection strip should be fitted to the frame on the opening side;l) if the door is outward opening, an anti-bar strip may be incorporated to frustrate attacks on the locking side.39. Where the ceiling of the room is accessible from a vulnerable area, e.g. a loft, its security should be enhanced by the installation of a weldmesh grille secured to the walls of the room or if an alarm is fitted, by a method of detecting any attack at this point.8. 
40. Ideally, there should be no windows in the gunroom if at ground floor/basement level. Secure ventilation to the following standard would be suitable:a) the fitting of a steel grille and internal baffle as in orb) an arrangement where the internal and external ventilation openings are not in line, the external ventilator facing a solid inner wall for at least the whole of its surface area.41. Any windows serving this room should be fitted with either:a) steel bars of not less than 19mm diameter or section at a maximum of 125mm vertical centres. Horizontal steel straps or crossbars to be welded to each upright at a maximum of 450mm spacing to resist jacking. The bars may be individually fitted, grouted in not less than 50mm and 50mm from inside edge; or mounted in a steel plate or angle frame fixed to the wall surround at no more than 250mm centres; orb) welded or expanded steel mesh grilles of at least 8swg (4.5mm) maximum 50mm x 50mm mesh, welded into an angle iron frame and installed as above.Armoury Building42. Building: the following criteria can be applied to a stand-alone armoury to store firearms and ammunition.43. Walls: the walls of an armoury should be constructed in any of the following ways, to satisfy the requirements of Part A of the Building Regulations:a) solid reinforced concrete of 250mm minimum thickness;b) walls of solid bonded brickwork or masonry of 325mm minimum thickness; orc) cavity walls of dense concrete block, brick or stone, not less than 275mm excluding the cavity. The construction should be an external leaf of 100mm and an internal leaf of 175mm minimum thickness.44. In an existing solid bonded brick/masonry or cavity wall not fulfilling the requirements of the preceding two paragraphs, one of the following provisions should be selected:a) increase the internal leaf material thickness to provide a wall of 275mm minimum thickness; orb) in the case of solid bonded brickwork etc. additional material, bonded to the existing thickness to produce a wall of not less than 325mm; orc) fitting of a substantial internal wire mesh reinforcement of not less than 2.3mm thickness, and of 50mm by 20mm maximum mesh size to be fixed either:a) 
i) directly to the wall at 300/400mm centres with mild steel washers and proprietary fixings or resin anchors. Each sheet should be butt jointed; orii) to steel angle frame of not less than 50mm by 50mm by 3mm with cross rails at not more than 1.2 metre centres to form an internal lining cage.45. Roof/ceiling: the roof or ceiling of an armoury should be constructed by any of the following methods:a) solid reinforced concrete of 150mm minimum thickness, tied into the walls. Where this forms the roof of a building, the concrete may be sloped to assist in draining of water. In this case, the thickness at the roof edge shall not be less than 120mm;b) vaulted brickwork or masonry, providing a ceiling of solid materials of not less than 300mm thickness;c) in the case of an existing roof/ceiling:i) upgrading by reinforced concrete to give a resistance comparable with a) above;ii) fitting of a substantial internal wire reinforcement of not less than 4.5mm thickness and of 50mm by 20mm maximum mesh size, secured to the floor joists using washers or proprietary steel clips held by screws of not less than 10 gauge giving a penetration into timber of at least 60mm at not more than 300mm centres;iii) the reinforcing should be laid so that the mesh, when reaching the edges of the ceiling/roof is either:ï folded down and secured to the walls with masonry or other heavy duty fixings; orï welded onto steel angle which is secured to the wall with masonry or other heavy duty fixings46. Floor: the floor of an armoury should be constructed either by:a) solid reinforced concrete of 150mm minimum thickness, tied to the walls. Where this forms part of the floor for any other part of the premises, this required thickness need only extend so far as is necessary to ensure the integrity of the bond between walls and the floor of the armoury; orb) vaulted brickwork or masonry, providing a floor of solid materials of not less than 300mm thickness; orc) in the case of an existing concrete, brickwork or masonry floor, by the provision of suitable upgrading to ensure that the provisions in the forgoing paragraphs are met; ord) in the case of an existing suspended timber floor:i) fitting of a sheet steel flooring, not less than 3mm in thickness, secured to the joists of the floor by screws of not less than 10 gauge giving a penetration into timber of at least 60mm at not more than 300mm centres; ori) 
ii) 	fitting of a substantial internal wire reinforcement of not less than 2.3mm thickness, and of 50mm by 20mm maximum mesh size. The panels to be overlaid by timber flooring of not less than 18mm thick secured to the floor joists by screws of not less than 10 gauge giving a penetration into the joist timber of at least 60mm at not more than 300mm centres. The finished floor being a sandwich of floorboard, mesh, overlaid floorboard laid so that the mesh, when reaching the edges of the floor is either:ï folded up and secured to the walls with masonry or other heavy duty fixings; orï welded onto steel angle that is secured to the wall with masonry or other heavy duty fixings;Any adaptation of existing floors must be calculated to ensure that the work proposed does not compromise the strength of the structure, existing timbers or supports.47. Doors: the door or doors and surround of an armoury should be constructed as follows: Doors should be of sheet steel and fabricated either as a:a) 10mm minimum thickness sheet steel door; orb) 6mm minimum thickness sheet steel door, stiffened by the provision of a 50mm by 50mm by 6mm steel angle or channel welded as close as possible to the four edges of the door, allowing for a minimum of 20mm of the door edges to overlay the angle of the frame on an outward opening door. The stiffening to be continuous and unbroken.48. Doors of either fabrication should be:a) hung on robust steel hinges continuously welded to the door and door surround. Hinges may be either externally or internally fitted. Doors over 1.5 metres in height should be fitted with not less than 3 hinges.b) if external hinges are chosen, hinge bolts must be fitted to prevent the door failing if the hinges have been destroyed/removed. Hinge bolts of not less than 40mm by 20mm cross section must be continuously welded to the inner surface on the hinge side of the door. The hinge bolts should fit snugly against the door surround, passing at least 20mm behind the surround.c) hinge bolts should be fitted to support each hinge provided on the door and in the case of only two being required, they must be positioned either at or above the level of the upper hinge, and at or below the lower hinge on the door;d) doors must be secured by at least two multi-lever mortice locks which comply with:i) British Standard 3621:2017 or its equivalent; orii) HELA Tech Doc 26/5 or other recognised equivalent; andiii) the locks must have a minimum 20mm bolt throw, measured from the face of the lock;i) 
iv) doors over 1.5 metres in height should be fitted with 3e) doors secured by a system of driven bolt work to the following standard are acceptable:ï the bolt work can be either lever or keyï along the opening edge, driving a minimum of 3 bolts, set equally spaced down that edge;ï there should be a minimum of 1 bolt operating along the top;ï where the door has a bottom channel forming part of the frame, a minimum of one bolt operating along the bottom;iii) the bolt work may include driven bolts acting as hinge bolts down the hanging side of the door. The number of such driven bolts must be the same as on a door with fixed hinge bolts;iv) the bolts must be of good quality steel, not less than 20mm by 30mm cross or 25mm diameter round bar. The bolts must pass not less than 20mm behind the frame when operated;v) the bolts must be installed in steel pockets constructed and fitted to the standard for lock pockets provided in paragraph 49 below, either:ï on a 10mm plate door, in at least 2 steel carriers constructed from 50mm by 10mm steel angle continuously welded to the door plateorï on a 6mm steel door with framing, the outer carrier may be the existing angle with a 6mm reinforcing plate welded continuously to the inner face of the angle and extending at least 25mm above and below the bolt slot top and bottom edges.vi) where round bolts are fitted, the steel angle should be not less than 60mm on that side through which the bolts pass;vii) the bolt work must be secured by two locks of the types specified in paragraph 37 or in (d)(I) or (ii) above, engaging into the driving bars at two separate locations within the driving linkage. It must effectively detain the whole of the linkage in the locked position when operated. The locks to be fitted in reinforced pockets, welded to the interior of the door.49. Locks must be enclosed in steel lock pockets that are continuously welded to the door. The two side plates should have a thickness of 6mm. The top and bottom edges should be steel blocks which are of a size to allow the lock to fit snugly into the pocket and provide sufficient height for the lock screws to be tapped into them.50. Lock pockets should be positioned as close as possible to the vertical edge of the door, while permitting the door to be opened without obstruction. When in the thrown position, the bolt of the lock should pass into a hole cut for this purpose in the steel angle stiffener fitted to the adjacent part of the surround of8. 
the door. The size of the hole should be such that it forms a snug fitting for the lock bolt and does not permit any movement of the door when locked.51. Where a Banham, Chubb or Erebus lock is fitted, it must be protected by an anti-drilling plate. This plate can be built into the lock pocket or may be welded on to the outside of the door.52. When the 6mm door pattern is chosen, the lock pockets must be fitted so that the edge of the angle is not cut through, but slotted to receive the pocket.53. For inward opening doors, lock bolt receivers fabricated to the standards above must be continuously welded to the surround. They should be constructed to permit only necessary play in the door. Their vertical opening should allow for any flexing/expanding the door may need.54. Door handles should be of weak construction to prevent their being used in any attack on the door.55. Door surrounds may be fabricated of either:a) 100mm by 75mm by 10mm steel angle with a 100mm by10mm plate continuously welded to the "L" to produce a "T" section frame 200mm by 75mm by 10mm; orb) 200mm by 75mm by 10mm steel "T" section.56. The surround must be secured by rag bolts or similar high strength masonry devices both on the external and internal faces of the "T" section surround. The fixings should not be greater than 400mm apart, and not more than 150mm from the corners.57. The surround should be constructed to ensure that the edges of an outward opening door overlap the receiving face of the frame by at least 20mm.58. If a double door unit is required, then the following additional items are required:a) the first closing leaf should have bolts fitted with a diameter or respective sides not less than 20mm. The bolt cases should be welded to the internal faces, top and bottom, engaging behind the frame or into a strong steel housing for a distance of not less than 20mm;b) a flat steel strip should be welded along the length of the edge of the first closing leaf to provide a rest-point for the second door and to conceal the location of the lock bolts;c) the doors require a minimum of three locks.59. Ventilation/lighting: unless specifically required for air circulation, control of moisture etc. there should be no ventilation openings in the armoury.60. In adapting existing premises, windows and other ventilation provisions should be removed and the opening made good to the level of the surrounding masonry etc.61. Where ventilation is specifically required, the preferred options are:8. 
a) ventilation in a wall already within another part of the premises;b) secure staggered ventilation in an external wall.62. Ventilation openings should be constructed in the following way: external openings of all ducts or openings should be protected by metal grilles of not less than 2.5mm steel plate, secured into the surrounding walls with non-return fixings or rag bolts not less than 75mm long and 15mm diameter fitted, dependent upon the type of ventilation opening.63. The course of a ventilation opening must either be:a) in solid walls, ventilation shafts must be staggered upwards or sloped from outside. The inner opening(s) must be protected by the provision of a steel baffle plate of not less than 6mm steel plate mounted so that the plate overlaps its fixing bolts by at least 25mm in each direction. Rag bolts of not less than 20mm diameter must be anchored into the walls at not less than 230mm from each side of the opening. The plate should stand off from the surface of the wall by not more than 50mm.b) cavity walls should be constructed so that the openings in the outside and inside section of the wall are not in direct alignment vertically or horizontally with one another. In this arrangement, the external opening should be placed below the line of the internal opening;c) in an existing cavity wall constructed with a 'straight through' ventilation opening, the inner opening may either be:iii. bricked up, with the brickwork being tied to the surrounds to ensure uniform strength. A new internal opening then being formed to comply with the above; oriv. the provision of an internal steel baffle as specified above and external metal grille.Where vents form part of piped connections in an air conditioning or circulation system which is operated by powered fans or similar electrical arrangements which do not give direct passage between the armoury wall(s) and the outside of the building, then it will be sufficient to provide protection to the immediate point of entry to the armoury.64. Lighting should be provided to ensure that persons in the armoury can operate safely and securely. Any lighting system must provide sufficient illumination in the armoury to allow for proper supervision. Enclosed fittings must be used in such areas.65. A system of secondary lighting, to comply with the requirements of BS5266- 2016, must be provided in the event of a power failure.66. In the event of any person being closed in the armoury, there must be an alarm to give indication that this has occurred.67. Steel Armoury: the following should be considered with a steel armoury manufactured to the standards of HELA Tech 26/5, where the material is not less than 10mm.8. 
68. As a general principal, such a unit should be protected from the weather. The provision of a weather resistant surround, e.g. timber building, could reduce the necessary maintenance and assist in reducing the internal temperature variations which such metal enclosures generate.69. The general principles applying to the fabrication of a steel armoury are:a) constructed from mild steel plate to BSEN 10025-1:2004 or equivalent;b) welding to be completed to a Welding Approved Accredited Recognised Standard such as BS EN IS0 9606-1:2013 or equivalent;c) each unit should be fitted with strong, steel channels securely welded to the base. At four points, suitably-spaced holes should be drilled through the channel and the adjacent parts of the steel base. The diameter of these holes should be just sufficient to accept a 20mm diameter bolt. The unit should stand on a base of good quality concrete at least 300mm thick. The 20mm rag bolts should be fixed firmly to a depth of at least 150mm. The threaded upper ends of the bolts should pass through the holes in the steel channel and terminate just below the wooden floor level. The concrete base should be thoroughly cured before fixing the unit in position, otherwise distortion can occur and doors may not fit properly.d) the opening for the door should be stiffened by steel angles of not less than 50mm x 50mm x 6mm welded to the walls so that, when the door is closed, its inner surfaces meet at the top and at the vertical sides for a distance of about 20mm inwards from the edge. Alternatively, the horizontal parts of the framework maybe stiffened by a steel bar, 10mm to 15mm thick, welded to the inner surface of the roof and, at each end, to the walls on either side of the door.e) the door should be of a minimum 10mm thick steel plate and should be stiffened by the provision of steel angles or channel (50mm x 50mm x 6mm) welded to the inner surfaces of the door as close to the four edges as possible. The angle should be continuous and unbroken.f) the door should hang by means of robust steel hinges continuously welded both to the door and to the door surround. The hinges may be fitted internally or externally;g) for doors with external hinges, hinge bolts should be provided. Hinge bolts should be continuously welded to the inner surface at the hinge side of the door and extend to a distance of at least 20mm behind the door surround. When the door is in a closed position, the hinge bolts should fit snugly against the door surround. The bolts to be of not less than 20mm by 40mm cross-sectional. The upper bolts should be positioned at or above the level of the hinge; with lower hinge bolts at or below the level of the lower hinge. The number of hinge bolts fitted should be dependent on the height of the door, but in no case should there be fewer than two. Where there are more than two, it is desirable that they be equally spaced;h) the door must fit flush with the walls and any gaps around the door must be the minimum necessary to permit the door to open and close freely;i) some manufacturers fit internal hinges. The design of these hinges should be such that they must not straighten if subjected to a lever-attack on the hinge side of the door with suitable hinge and the means by which it may be fixed to the door surround. It should be noted that, in order to provide additional strength, the hinge is also welded to the adjacent parts of the steel angle stiffening pieces;a) 
j) at least two hinges must be fitted. Doors with a height of 1.5m or over should be fitted with three hinges, whether they be internal or external;k) the doors should be secured by at least two mortice locks as specified for steel doors in buildings constructed as armouries.l) each lock should be enclosed within a steel lock pocket, fabricated and fitted as specified for steel doors in buildings constructed as armouries;m) the end of the lock bolt should be protected by means of a piece of 6mm steel angle or plate welded across the door surround stiffening angle in such a position to prevent an attack on the bolt.n) door handles should be of weak construction to prevent their being used to assist in an attack on the door.70. Where for safety reasons a steel unit must be ventilated, the simplest form of ventilation is a number of 5mm diameter holes drilled through the front and rear walls of the unit. Whatever form of ventilation is used, it should be protected by a 6mm thick steel cover-plate welded to the outside of the walls, covering the area of the ventilation holes and open only at the bottom.71. All steel armouries should be lined with timber walls, floor and ceiling, of at least flooring strength, fitted to timber bearers to allow at least 75mm air gap between steel wall and inner surface. Where increased resistance is deemed necessary, a metal mesh liner as previously defined can be installed between timber walls and the backs of any racks or weapon cabinets fitted inside the armoury.72. The following requirements are applicable to Armouries of any construction where circumstances warrant an enhanced level of security.Internal Firearms Security: within any armoury there should be provided a system for secure separation of individual person's firearms, where there is more than one user. This may be achieved by:a) individual lockers or cabinets for each person sharing the facility;b) weapons racks with individually locked anchored chain or security cord;c) wire mesh cages or weapon racks with separate lock (for multiple weapons, i.e. clubs sharing same facility).74. Alarms (where appropriate): the armoury and all areas deemed part of a "secured area" should be protected by an intruder alarm installed to at least British Standard BS 4737-3.30:2015 by a compliant installer.75. The alarm should be so designed and installed that its components and system will:a) detect any physical attack on the structure of an armoury at the time the attack commences on the outer surfacesa) 
b) on all other secured areas, provide detection by suitable motion detection devicesc) provide signalling by a secured and monitored system to the current NPCC Intruder Alarm Policyd) any safety alarms activated by a person locked inside a secured area must provide audible warning which, if not cancelled within a specific safety time, signals out to the monitoring station;e) provide either fixed or wire free devices ("panic" buttons or pendants) for signalling personal attack on persons on or at the premises;f) provide silent duress coding in the event of a forced disarming of the system;g) give suitable local visual and audible warning that an attack on the premises has been detected.a) 
ANNEX BCARRIAGE (BY PRIVATE INDIVIDUALS) OF BLACK POWDER & SMALL ARMS AMMUNITION FOR USE IN SMALL ARMS AND MODEL ROCKET MOTORSGuidance on Good Practice drafted by representatives of the Police and the Shooting Sports, in conjunction with HSE1. The transportation of explosives by private individuals in their own motor vehicles for leisure activities is permitted within certain weight limits. Explosives include black powder (gunpowder), smokeless powders, small arms ammunition for use in small arms, and model rocket motors. It is the responsibility of the individual carrying the explosives to ensure that the prescribed limits are not exceeded. Given the instances of road accidents, care must always be taken to prevent the presence of explosives from increasing the hazard produced by the accident to the driver, passengers and any other persons.2. To that end, the following are recommended methods of transporting those explosives in a safe and secure manner by road. They do not cover the restrictions placed on the carriage of explosives by rail or by any form of public transport.3. The person who is in lawful possession of the explosives must ensure that the vehicle, when parked and unattended, is locked and any immobiliser or alarm should be set. If possible the vehicle should be parked within the sight of the responsible person and not left unattended for any longer than is necessary for the immediate comfort or refreshment of that individual(s).4. Where a vehicle is to be left unattended, the explosives must be removed. Failing this, the explosives must be held in a locked container secured to the vehicle so that the container, together with the vehicle, provides a secure place of keeping.5. Only classified explosives may be carried and they should always remain in their original packaging. This packaging displays the appropriate hazard warning and security labels. The packages of explosives, or where required their contents may also be placed in one of the following accepted containers:a) a container, not the original, but displaying the appropriate carriage and security information;b) powder flasks or containers designed or adapted to throw a measured or measurable charge, having a fully closed plate or removable stopper;c) closed or stoppered tubes or phials designed to contain sufficient powder or propellant for one shot;d) gunpowder twists carried in a closed container;e) in the case of small arms ammunition and cartridges, in a robust bag designed for the purpose.a) 
6. The package, with original hazard labels, or the above, suitably identified must be kept out of view and properly restrained to prevent any movement likely to result from any normal motion of the vehicles or impact in the event of collision. The object is to avoid having the explosives in a position that it is close to those parts of the vehicle likely to be subject of impact.7. Explosives should be separated from and protected from any other hazardous materials or sources of vehicle fire. Only items classified as UN Hazard Code 1.4S (e.g., small arms cartridges) may be carried with other dangerous goods (e.g., fuel cans, gas bottles, paints, solvents etc.). Black powder is not classified as 1.4S, so separation of black powder, propellants and rocket motors from hazardous materials is required so as to prevent the accidental initiation of one by the other.8. Containers and the areas in the vehicle in which the explosives are to be carried should be kept clean and free from contamination, particularly by grit.9. For security of the explosives, they should be kept in the boot or any other lockable storage area within the vehicle. In the case of an estate car or similar, where the Explosives are being carried in the load carrying area, the responsible person should ensure that the lid or cover is in place. In the absence of such a lid or cover, the items should be covered or concealed in such a way as to prevent their identification.10. In the interests of safety, the person possessing the explosives in carriage should ensure that all occupants of the vehicle are aware that potential hazards, such as smoking, naked flames or sparks are strictly forbidden inside or close to the vehicle.1. 

ANNEX DSTANDARDS REFERRED TO WITHIN THE TEXT OF THE HANDBOOKSTS 202 / STS 201	Burglary rating for doors and widows LPS 2081	Burglary rating for doors and windowsBS 7558 : 1992Specifications for gun cabinetsBS 3621 : 2017Thief resistant locks for hinged doorsCEN 4Specifications for padlocksBS 4737 :3.30:2015Intruder alarm systems in buildingsBS EN 50131-2017Wire free intruder alarm systemsBS 8220Security of buildings against crime Part 1 – DwellingsBS PAS 024 : 2016Specification for doors of enhanced securityPAS 24 2016Windows of enhanced securityBS EN 356:2000(Under Review)Specification for anti-bandit glazing (glazing resistant to manual attack)BS 5337 : 2007Code of practice for the installation of security glazingLPS 1175Loss prevention standard – The Loss Prevention Certification Board Specification for testing and classifying the burglary resistance of building components, strong points and security enclosures.
GuidanceFly-tipping: council responsibilitiesHow local authorities must deal with fly-tipping and the penaltiesthey can charge.From: Department for Environment, Food & Rural Affairs (/government/organisations/department-for-environment-food-rural-affairs)Published 27 June 2016Last updated 28 March 2024 —Fly-tipping is illegal dumping of liquid or solid waste on land or in water. The waste is usually dumped to avoid disposal costs.Fly-tipping: your responsibilitiesAssess the incident
You must gather as much information as you can about: the circumstances, for example if anyone witnessed the fly-tipping, the date and time it happened and a description of any vehicles involved land type, for example relevant land (https://www.gov.uk/guidance/litter-and-refuse- council-responsibilities-to-keep-land-clear#land-councils-must-keep-clear) or privately owned  location, for example highway verge, back alleyway, railway embankment or river  the amount and type of waste, for example solid, liquid or gas its potential effects, for example how it may harm people, animals or the environmentFly-tipping on landYou must remove and dispose of all fly-tipped waste if it’s on relevant land (https://www.gov.uk/guidance/litter-and-refuse-council-responsibilities-to-keep-land-  clear#land-councils-must-keep-clear).However, you need to contact the Environment Ag ency (https://www.gov.uk/government/org anisations/environment-agency#org -contacts) if the illegally dumped waste is:  more than 20 tonnes (about 20 cubic metres)  more than 5 cubic metres of fibrous asbestos or 75 litres of potentially hazardous waste in drums or containers  possibly linked to criminal business activity or organised crimeOnly refer small amounts of fly-tipping if you know it’s linked to crime - you may want to develop a local agreement with the Environment Agency and other partners where there is a known waste crime problem.If you find asbestos in the waste, report the fly-tipping incident to the Health and Safety Executive (https://www.hse.gov.uk/forms/incident/).Fly-tipping in waterYou must remove and dispose of fly-tipped waste in water on council land. You may investigate or enforce if the waste:is causing amenity issues in an ordinary watercourse or main river (https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/main-river-map-for-england-proposed-  changes-and-decisions)
  risks polluting a non-controlled waterThe Environment Agency may remove waste, investigate or enforce when there is:significant flood risk on a main river (https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/main- river-map-for-england-proposed-changes-and-decisions) or critical ordinary watercourserisk of pollution to controlled waterInvestigation, penalties and prosecutionYou should investigate fly tipping incidents relevant land or water (https://www.gov.uk/guidance/litter-and-refuse-council-responsibilities-to-keep-land-  clear#land-councils-must-keep-clear). Following your investigation, you may choose to pursue enforcement action.The Environment Agency may investigate if the incident is large-scale, serious, organised illegal dumping or immediately threatens human health or the environment.If a landowner reports fly-tipped waste on their land you can choose whether to investigate.Preliminary investigationsCarry out a preliminary investigation to assess whether to take further action based on: how serious the offence is  potential costs  likelihood of prosecutionThis might involve a review of:witness claims the sceneevidence, for example CCTV footage
Full investigationIf you carry out a criminal investigation it must be in line with the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 (https://www.gov.uk/guidance/police-and-criminal-evidence-act-1984- pace-codes-of-practice).You must carry out surveillance and investigations in line with Regulatory Investigation Powers Act (RIPA) 2000 parts 1 and 2 (http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2000/23/contents). See the local authority use of RIPA guidance (https://www.gov.uk/guidance/surveillance-and-counter-terrorism#local- authority-use-of-ripa).You can:  check if the offender has complied with their waste duty of care(https://www.gov.uk/dispose-business-commercial-waste)  seize a vehicle, trailer or mobile plant (https://www.gov.uk/guidance/local-authorities- seizing-vehicles-for-suspected-waste-crime) you suspect of being involved in waste crime  use your right to legally enter land, vehicles or premises - see the powers of entry(https://www.gov.uk/guidance/powers-of-entry) guidance serve a notice (http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/1990/43/section/71) on anyone you think can provide information on the driver of a vehicle used at the time when the offence was committedPenalties and noticesYou can issue a fixed penalty notice if it’s in line with your enforcement policy. You can refer to litter enforcement guidance(https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/code-of-practice-on-litter-and-refuse) when taking enforcement action against fly-tipping and related offences.The fixed penalty notice is not an appropriate sanction for: operators in the waste management industry  repeat offenders  those responsible for large-scale fly-tipping or the fly-tipping of hazardous wasteThese types of incidents will be enforced by local authorities or the Environment Agency using existing prosecution powers.You can serve and enforce a notice(http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/1990/43/section/59) requiring the occupier of the land
to remove fly-tipped waste and remediate the land.ProsecutionsYou can prosecute using:  Environmental Protection Act 1990 section 33 Environmental Permitting (England and Wales) Regulations 2016, regulations 12 and 38 Environmental Permitting (England and Wales) Regulations 2016, schedule 21 – water discharge activitiesConvicted parties can be fined an unlimited amount or imprisoned for up to 5 years. Tell the Environment Ag ency (https://www.gov.uk/government/org anisations/environment- agency#org -contacts) if your prosecution results in a conviction - it may need to review licences or permits.Read the National Fly-Tipping Prevention Group g uidance on how to present robust cases to court (https://www.keepbritaintidy.org /national-fly-tipping-prevention-g roup#:~:text=The%20National%20Fly- Tipping%20Prevention%20Group%20%28NFTPG%29%20is%20a,fire%20service%2C%20pri  vate%20landowners%20and%20the%20devolved%20administrations.).Claiming costsYou or the Environment Agency may attempt to recover the costs spent on investigations, clean up and enforcement work from the: polluter  occupier or landownerKeeping recordsRecord the details of the fly-tipping incident, costs incurred and any action(s) taken in the fly-tipping module of the Waste Data Flow(http://www.wastedataflow.org /login.aspx).Prevent fly-tippingRead the National Fly-tipping Prevention Group (NFTPG) guidance (https://www.keepbritaintidy.org /fly-tipping-advice-individuals-landowners-businesses) on how to prevent fly-tipping and a selection of case studies from the Fly-tipping
Intervention Grant Scheme (https://www.keepbritaintidy.org /fly-tipping-intervention-g rant- scheme) that show local authority best practice.Published 27 June 2016Last updated 28 March 2024 + show all updatesAll content is available under the Open GovernmentLicence v3.0, except where otherwise stated	© Crown copyright
Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Fraud Act 2006. (See end of Document for details)Fraud Act 20062006 CHAPTER 35An Act to make provision for, and in connection with, criminal liability for fraud and obtaining services dishonestly.	[8th November 2006]BE IT ENACTED by the Queen's most Excellent Majesty, by and with the advice and consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons, in this present Parliament assembled, and by the authority of the same, as follows:—Fraud1 Fraud(1) A person is guilty of fraud if he is in breach of any of the sections listed in subsection (2) (which provide for different ways of committing the offence).(2) The sections are—(a) section 2 (fraud by false representation),(b) section 3 (fraud by failing to disclose information), and(c) section 4 (fraud by abuse of position).(3) A person who is guilty of fraud is liable—(a) on summary conviction, to imprisonment for a term not exceeding [F1the general limit in a magistrates’ court] or to a fine not exceeding the statutory maximum (or to both);(b) on conviction on indictment, to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 10 years or to a fine (or to both).(4) Subsection (3)(a) applies in relation to Northern Ireland as if the reference to 12 months were a reference to 6 months.(1) 
2 Fraud Act 2006 (c. 35)Document Generated: 2024-05-18Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Fraud Act 2006. (See end of Document for details)2 Fraud by false representation(1) A person is in breach of this section if he—(a) dishonestly makes a false representation, and(b) intends, by making the representation—(i) to make a gain for himself or another, or(ii) to cause loss to another or to expose another to a risk of loss.(2) A representation is false if—(a) it is untrue or misleading, and(b) the person making it knows that it is, or might be, untrue or misleading.(3) “Representation” means any representation as to fact or law, including a representation as to the state of mind of—(a) the person making the representation, or(b) any other person.(4) A representation may be express or implied.(5) For the purposes of this section a representation may be regarded as made if it (or anything implying it) is submitted in any form to any system or device designed to receive, convey or respond to communications (with or without human intervention).3 Fraud by failing to disclose informationA person is in breach of this section if he—(a) dishonestly fails to disclose to another person information which he is under a legal duty to disclose, and(b) intends, by failing to disclose the information—(i) to make a gain for himself or another, or(ii) to cause loss to another or to expose another to a risk of loss.4 Fraud by abuse of position(1) A person is in breach of this section if he—(a) occupies a position in which he is expected to safeguard, or not to act against, the financial interests of another person,(b) dishonestly abuses that position, and(c) intends, by means of the abuse of that position—(i) to make a gain for himself or another, or(ii) to cause loss to another or to expose another to a risk of loss.(2) A person may be regarded as having abused his position even though his conduct consisted of an omission rather than an act.(1) 
Fraud Act 2006 (c. 35)	3Document Generated: 2024-05-18Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Fraud Act 2006. (See end of Document for details)5 “Gain” and “loss”(1) The references to gain and loss in sections 2 to 4 are to be read in accordance with this section.(2) “Gain” and “loss”—(a) extend only to gain or loss in money or other property;(b) include any such gain or loss whether temporary or permanent;and “property” means any property whether real or personal (including things in action and other intangible property).(3) “Gain” includes a gain by keeping what one has, as well as a gain by getting what one does not have.(4) “Loss” includes a loss by not getting what one might get, as well as a loss by parting with what one has.6 Possession etc. of articles for use in frauds(1) A person is guilty of an offence if he has in his possession or under his control any article for use in the course of or in connection with any fraud.(2) A person guilty of an offence under this section is liable—(a) on summary conviction, to imprisonment for a term not exceeding [F2the general limit in a magistrates’ court] or to a fine not exceeding the statutory maximum (or to both);(b) on conviction on indictment, to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 5 years or to a fine (or to both).(3) Subsection (2)(a) applies in relation to Northern Ireland as if the reference to 12 months were a reference to 6 months.7 Making or supplying articles for use in frauds(1) A person is guilty of an offence if he makes, adapts, supplies or offers to supply any article—(a) knowing that it is designed or adapted for use in the course of or in connection with fraud, or(b) intending it to be used to commit, or assist in the commission of, fraud.(2) A person guilty of an offence under this section is liable—(a) on summary conviction, to imprisonment for a term not exceeding [F3the general limit in a magistrates’ court] or to a fine not exceeding the statutory maximum (or to both);(b) on conviction on indictment, to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 10 years or to a fine (or to both).(a) 
4	Fraud Act 2006 (c. 35)Document Generated: 2024-05-18Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Fraud Act 2006. (See end of Document for details)(3) Subsection (2)(a) applies in relation to Northern Ireland as if the reference to 12 months were a reference to 6 months.8 “Article”(1) For the purposes of—(a) sections 6 and 7, and(b) the provisions listed in subsection (2), so far as they relate to articles for use in the course of or in connection with fraud,“article” includes any program or data held in electronic form.(2) The provisions are—(a) section 1(7)(b) of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 (c. 60),(b) section 2(8)(b) of the Armed Forces Act 2001 (c. 19), and(c) Article 3(7)(b) of the Police and Criminal Evidence (Northern Ireland) Order 1989 (S.I. 1989/1341 (N.I. 12));(meaning of “prohibited articles” for the purposes of stop and search powers).9 Participating in fraudulent business carried on by sole trader etc.(1) A person is guilty of an offence if he is knowingly a party to the carrying on of a business to which this section applies.(2) This section applies to a business which is carried on—(a) by a person who is outside the reach of [F4section 993 of the Companies Act 2006] (offence of fraudulent trading), and(b) with intent to defraud creditors of any person or for any other fraudulent purpose.(3) The following are within the reach of [F5that section]—(a) a company [F6(as defined in section 1(1) of the Companies Act 2006)];(b) a person to whom that section applies (with or without adaptations or modifications) as if the person were a company;(c) a person exempted from the application of that section.(4) F7. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .(5) “Fraudulent purpose” has the same meaning as in [F8that section].(6) A person guilty of an offence under this section is liable—(a) on summary conviction, to imprisonment for a term not exceeding [F9the general limit in a magistrates’ court] or to a fine not exceeding the statutory maximum (or to both);(a) 
Fraud Act 2006 (c. 35)	5Document Generated: 2024-05-18Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Fraud Act 2006. (See end of Document for details)(b) on conviction on indictment, to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 10 years or to a fine (or to both).(7) Subsection (6)(a) applies in relation to Northern Ireland as if the reference to 12 months were a reference to 6 months.F1010	Participating in fraudulent business carried on by company etc.: penalty. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Obtaining services dishonestly11 Obtaining services dishonestly(1) A person is guilty of an offence under this section if he obtains services for himself or another—(a) by a dishonest act, and(b) in breach of subsection (2).(2) A person obtains services in breach of this subsection if—(1) 
6	Fraud Act 2006 (c. 35)Document Generated: 2024-05-18Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Fraud Act 2006. (See end of Document for details)(a) they are made available on the basis that payment has been, is being or will be made for or in respect of them,(b) he obtains them without any payment having been made for or in respect of them or without payment having been made in full, and(c) when he obtains them, he knows—(i) that they are being made available on the basis described in paragraph (a), or(ii) that they might be,but intends that payment will not be made, or will not be made in full.(3) A person guilty of an offence under this section is liable—(a) on summary conviction, to imprisonment for a term not exceeding [F11the general limit in a magistrates’ court] or to a fine not exceeding the statutory maximum (or to both);(b) on conviction on indictment, to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 5 years or to a fine (or to both).(4) Subsection (3)(a) applies in relation to Northern Ireland as if the reference to 12 months were a reference to 6 months.Supplementary12 Liability of company officers for offences by company(1) Subsection (2) applies if an offence under this Act is committed by a body corporate.(2) If the offence is proved to have been committed with the consent or connivance of—(a) a director, manager, secretary or other similar officer of the body corporate, or(b) a person who was purporting to act in any such capacity,he (as well as the body corporate) is guilty of the offence and liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.(3) If the affairs of a body corporate are managed by its members, subsection (2) applies in relation to the acts and defaults of a member in connection with his functions of management as if he were a director of the body corporate.13 Evidence(1) A person is not to be excused from—(a) answering any question put to him in proceedings relating to property, or(b) complying with any order made in proceedings relating to property,on the ground that doing so may incriminate him or his spouse or civil partner of an offence under this Act or a related offence.
Fraud Act 2006 (c. 35)	7Document Generated: 2024-05-18Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Fraud Act 2006. (See end of Document for details)(2) But, in proceedings for an offence under this Act or a related offence, a statement or admission made by the person in—(a) answering such a question, or(b) complying with such an order,is not admissible in evidence against him or (unless they married or became civil partners after the making of the statement or admission) his spouse or civil partner.(3) “Proceedings relating to property” means any proceedings for—(a) the recovery or administration of any property,(b) the execution of a trust, or(c) an account of any property or dealings with property,and “property” means money or other property whether real or personal (including things in action and other intangible property).(4) “Related offence” means—(a) conspiracy to defraud;(b) any other offence involving any form of fraudulent conduct or purpose.14 Minor and consequential amendments etc.(1) Schedule 1 contains minor and consequential amendments.(2) Schedule 2 contains transitional provisions and savings.(3) Schedule 3 contains repeals and revocations.15 Commencement and extent(1) This Act (except this section and section 16) comes into force on such day as the Secretary of State may appoint by an order made by statutory instrument; and different days may be appointed for different purposes.(2) Subject to subsection (3), sections 1 to 9 and 11 to 13 extend to England and Wales and Northern Ireland only.(3) Section 8, so far as it relates to the Armed Forces Act 2001 (c. 19), extends to any place to which that Act extends.(4) Any amendment in section 10 or Schedule 1, and any related provision in section 14 or Schedule 2 or 3, extends to any place to which the provision which is the subject of the amendment extends.16 Short titleThis Act may be cited as the Fraud Act 2006.
8	Fraud Act 2006 (c. 35)SCHEDULE 1 – Minor and consequential amendmentsDocument Generated: 2024-05-18Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Fraud Act 2006. (See end of Document for details)SCHEDULES SCHEDULE 1	Section 14(1)MINOR AND CONSEQUENTIAL AMENDMENTSAbolition of various deception offences1 Omit the following provisions—(a) in the Theft Act 1968 (c. 60)—(i) section 15 (obtaining property by deception);(ii) section 15A (obtaining a money transfer by deception);(iii) section 16 (obtaining pecuniary advantage by deception);(iv) section 20(2) (procuring the execution of a valuable security by deception);(b) in the Theft Act 1978 (c. 31)—(i) section 1 (obtaining services by deception);(ii) section 2 (evasion of liability by deception);(c) in the Theft Act (Northern Ireland) 1969 (c. 16 (N.I.))—(i) section 15 (obtaining property by deception);(ii) section 15A (obtaining a money transfer by deception);(iii) section 16 (obtaining pecuniary advantage by deception);(iv) section 19(2) (procuring the execution of a valuable security by deception);(d) in the Theft (Northern Ireland) Order 1978 (S.I. 1978/1407 (N.I. 23))—(i) Article 3 (obtaining services by deception);(ii) Article 4 (evasion of liability by deception).Visiting Forces Act 1952 (c. 67)2 In the Schedule (offences referred to in section 3 of the 1952 Act), in paragraph 3 (meaning of “offence against property”), after sub-paragraph (l) insert—“(m)	the Fraud Act 2006.”Theft Act 1968 (c. 60)3 Omit section 15B (section 15A: supplementary).4 In section 18(1) (liability of company officers for offences by company under section 15, 16 or 17), omit “ 15, 16 or ”.5 In section 20(3) (suppression etc. of documents—interpretation), omit “deception” has the same meaning as in section 15 of this Act, and ”.1 
Fraud Act 2006 (c. 35)	9SCHEDULE 1 – Minor and consequential amendmentsDocument Generated: 2024-05-18Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Fraud Act 2006. (See end of Document for details)6 (1) In section 24(4) (meaning of “stolen goods”) for “in the circumstances described in section 15(1) of this Act” substitute “ , subject to subsection (5) below, by fraud (within the meaning of the Fraud Act 2006) ”.(2) After section 24(4) insert—“(5) Subsection (1) above applies in relation to goods obtained by fraud as if—(a) the reference to the commencement of this Act were a reference to the commencement of the Fraud Act 2006, and(b) the reference to an offence under this Act were a reference to an offence under section 1 of that Act.”7 (1) In section 24A (dishonestly retaining a wrongful credit), omit subsections (3) and(4) and after subsection (2) insert—“(2A) A credit to an account is wrongful to the extent that it derives from—(a) theft;(b) blackmail;(c) fraud (contrary to section 1 of the Fraud Act 2006); or(d) stolen goods.”(2) In subsection (7), for “subsection (4)” substitute “ subsection (2A) ”.(3) For subsection (9) substitute—“(9) “Account” means an account kept with—(a) a bank;(b) a person carrying on a business which falls within subsection (10) below; or(c) an issuer of electronic money (as defined for the purposes of Part 2 of the Financial Services and Markets Act 2000).(10) A business falls within this subsection if—(a) in the course of the business money received by way of deposit is lent to others; or(b) any other activity of the business is financed, wholly or to any material extent, out of the capital of or the interest on money received by way of deposit.(11) References in subsection (10) above to a deposit must be read with—(a) section 22 of the Financial Services and Markets Act 2000;(b) any relevant order under that section; and(c) Schedule 2 to that Act;but any restriction on the meaning of deposit which arises from the identity of the person making it is to be disregarded.(12) For the purposes of subsection (10) above—(a) all the activities which a person carries on by way of business shall be regarded as a single business carried on by him; and(b) “money” includes money expressed in a currency other than sterling.”8 In section 25 (going equipped for burglary, theft or cheat)—1 
10	Fraud Act 2006 (c. 35)SCHEDULE 1 – Minor and consequential amendmentsDocument Generated: 2024-05-18Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Fraud Act 2006. (See end of Document for details)(a) in subsections (1) and (3) for “burglary, theft or cheat” substitute “ burglary or theft ”, and(b) in subsection (5) omit “ , and “cheat” means an offence under section 15 of this Act ”.Theft Act (Northern Ireland) 1969 (c. 16 (N.I.))9 Omit section 15B (section 15A: supplementary).10 In section 19(3) (suppression etc. of documents—interpretation), omit “deception” has the same meaning as in section 15, and ”.11 (1) In section 23(5) (meaning of “stolen goods”) for “in the circumstances described in section 15(1)” substitute “ , subject to subsection (6), by fraud (within the meaning of the Fraud Act 2006) ”.(2) After section 23(5) insert—“(6) Subsection (1) applies in relation to goods obtained by fraud as if—(a) the reference to the commencement of this Act were a reference to the commencement of the Fraud Act 2006, and(b) the reference to an offence under this Act were a reference to an offence under section 1 of that Act.”12 (1) In section 23A (dishonestly retaining a wrongful credit), omit subsections (3) and(4) and after subsection (2) insert—“(2A) A credit to an account is wrongful to the extent that it derives from—(a) theft;(b) blackmail;(c) fraud (contrary to section 1 of the Fraud Act 2006); or(d) stolen goods.”(2) In subsection (7), for “subsection (4)” substitute “ subsection (2A) ”.(3) For subsection (9) substitute—“(9) “Account” means an account kept with—(a) a bank;(b) a person carrying on a business which falls within subsection (10); or(c) an issuer of electronic money (as defined for the purposes of Part 2 of the Financial Services and Markets Act 2000).(10) A business falls within this subsection if—(a) in the course of the business money received by way of deposit is lent to others; or(b) any other activity of the business is financed, wholly or to any material extent, out of the capital of or the interest on money received by way of deposit.(11) References in subsection (10) to a deposit must be read with—(a) section 22 of the Financial Services and Markets Act 2000;(b) any relevant order under that section; and(c) Schedule 2 to that Act;(a) 
Fraud Act 2006 (c. 35)	11SCHEDULE 1 – Minor and consequential amendmentsDocument Generated: 2024-05-18Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Fraud Act 2006. (See end of Document for details)but any restriction on the meaning of deposit which arises from the identity of the person making it is to be disregarded.(12) For the purposes of subsection (10)—(a) all the activities which a person carries on by way of business shall be regarded as a single business carried on by him; and(b) “money” includes money expressed in a currency other than sterling.”13 In section 24 (going equipped for burglary, theft or cheat)—(a) in subsections (1) and (3), for “burglary, theft or cheat” substitute “ burglary or theft ”, and(b) in subsection (5), omit “ , and “cheat” means an offence under section 15 ”.Theft Act 1978 (c. 31)14 In section 4 (punishments), omit subsection (2)(a).15 In section 5 (supplementary), omit subsection (1).Theft (Northern Ireland) Order 1978 (S.I. 1978/1407 (N.I. 23))16 In Article 6 (punishments), omit paragraph (2)(a).17 In Article 7 (supplementary), omit paragraph (1).Limitation Act 1980 (c. 58)18 In section 4 (special time limit in case of theft), for subsection (5)(b) substitute— “(b)	obtaining any chattel (in England and Wales or elsewhere) by—(i) blackmail (within the meaning of section 21 of the Theft Act 1968), or(ii) fraud (within the meaning of the Fraud Act 2006);”.Finance Act 1982 (c. 39)19 In section 11(1) (powers of Commissioners with respect to agricultural levies), for “or the Theft (Northern Ireland) Order 1978,” substitute “ , the Theft (Northern Ireland) Order 1978 or the Fraud Act 2006 ”.Nuclear Material (Offences) Act 1983 (c. 18)20 In section 1 (extended scope of certain offences), in subsection (1)(d), omit “ 15 or ” (in both places).Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 (c. 60)21 In section 1 (power of constable to stop and search persons, vehicles etc.), in subsection (8), for paragraph (d) substitute—“(d)	fraud (contrary to section 1 of the Fraud Act 2006).”
12	Fraud Act 2006 (c. 35)SCHEDULE 1 – Minor and consequential amendmentsDocument Generated: 2024-05-18Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Fraud Act 2006. (See end of Document for details)Limitation (Northern Ireland) Order 1989 (S.I. 1989/1339 (N.I. 11))22 In Article 18 (special time limit in case of theft), for paragraph (5)(b) substitute— “(b)	obtaining any chattel (in Northern Ireland or elsewhere) by—(i) blackmail (within the meaning of section 20 of the Theft Act (Northern Ireland) 1969), or(ii) fraud (within the meaning of the Fraud Act 2006);”.Police and Criminal Evidence (Northern Ireland) Order 1989 (S.I. 1989/1341 (N.I. 12))23 In Article 3 (power of constable to stop and search persons, vehicles etc.), in paragraph (8), for sub-paragraph (d) substitute—“(d)	fraud (contrary to section 1 of the Fraud Act 2006).”Criminal Justice Act 1993 (c. 36)24 (1) In section 1(2) (Group A offences), omit the entries in paragraph (a) relating to sections 15, 15A, 16 and 20(2) of the Theft Act 1968.(2) Omit section 1(2)(b).(3) Before section 1(2)(c) insert—“(bb)	an offence under any of the following provisions of the Fraud Act 2006—(i) section 1 (fraud);(ii) section 6 (possession etc. of articles for use in frauds);(iii) section 7 (making or supplying articles for use in frauds);(iv) section 9 (participating in fraudulent business carried on by sole trader etc.);(v) section 11 (obtaining services dishonestly).”25 (1) Amend section 2 (jurisdiction in respect of Group A offences) as follows.(2) In subsection (1), after “means” insert “ (subject to subsection (1A)) ”.(3) After subsection (1) insert—“(1A) In relation to an offence under section 1 of the Fraud Act 2006 (fraud), “relevant event” includes—(a) if the fraud involved an intention to make a gain and the gain occurred, that occurrence;(b) if the fraud involved an intention to cause a loss or to expose another to a risk of loss and the loss occurred, that occurrence.”Criminal Justice (Northern Ireland) Order 1994 (S.I. 1994/2795 (N.I. 15))26 In Article 14 (compensation orders), in paragraphs (3) and (4)(a) for “or Article 172 of the Road Traffic (Northern Ireland) Order 1981” substitute “ , Article 172 of the Road Traffic (Northern Ireland) Order 1981 or the Fraud Act 2006 ”.1 
Fraud Act 2006 (c. 35)	13SCHEDULE 1 – Minor and consequential amendmentsDocument Generated: 2024-05-18Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Fraud Act 2006. (See end of Document for details)Criminal Justice (Northern Ireland) Order 1996 (S.I. 1996/3160 (N.I. 24))27 (1) In Article 38(2) (Group A offences), omit the entries in sub-paragraph (a) relating to sections 15, 15A, 16 and 19(2) of the Theft Act (Northern Ireland) 1969.(2) Omit Article 38(2)(b).(3) Before Article 38(2)(c) insert—“(bb)	an offence under any of the following provisions of the Fraud Act 2006—(i) section 1 (fraud);(ii) section 6 (possession etc. of articles for use in frauds);(iii) section 7 (making or supplying articles for use in frauds);(iv) section 9 (participating in fraudulent business carried on by sole trader etc.);(v) section 11 (obtaining services dishonestly).”28 (1) Amend Article 39 (jurisdiction in respect of Group A offences) as follows.(2) In paragraph (1), after “means” insert “ (subject to paragraph (1A)) ”.(3) After paragraph (1) insert—“(1A) In relation to an offence under section 1 of the Fraud Act 2006 (fraud), “relevant event” includes—(a) if the fraud involved an intention to make a gain and the gain occurred, that occurrence;(b) if the fraud involved an intention to cause a loss or to expose another to a risk of loss and the loss occurred, that occurrence.”Powers of Criminal Courts (Sentencing) Act 2000 (c. 6)F1229	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Terrorism Act 2000 (c. 11)30 (1) In Schedule 9 (scheduled offences), in paragraph 10, at the end of sub-paragraph (d) insert “ and ” and omit paragraph (e).(2) After paragraph 22A of that Schedule insert—(2) 
14	Fraud Act 2006 (c. 35)SCHEDULE 1 – Minor and consequential amendmentsDocument Generated: 2024-05-18Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Fraud Act 2006. (See end of Document for details)“Fraud Act 200623	Offences under section 1 of the Fraud Act 2006 (fraud) subject to note 2 below.”(3) In note 2 to Part 1 of Schedule 9, for “paragraph 10(a), (c) or (e)” substitute “ paragraph 10(a) or (c) or 23 ”.31 (1) In Schedule 12 (compensation), in paragraph 12(1), omit “ (within the meaning of section 15(4) of the Theft Act (Northern Ireland) 1969) ”.(2) After paragraph 12(1) of that Schedule insert—“(1A) “Deception” means any deception (whether deliberate or reckless) by words or conduct as to fact or as to law, including a deception as to the present intentions of the person using the deception or any other person.”Criminal Justice and Court Services Act 2000 (c. 43)32 (1) In Schedule 6 (trigger offences), in paragraph 1, omit the entry relating to section 15 of the Theft Act 1968.(2) After paragraph 2 of Schedule 6 insert—“3	Offences under the following provisions of the Fraud Act 2006 are trigger offences—section 1 (fraud)section 6 (possession etc. of articles for use in frauds) section 7 (making or supplying articles for use in frauds).”Armed Forces Act 2001 (c. 19)33 In section 2(9) (definition of prohibited articles for purposes of powers to stop and search), for paragraph (d) substitute—“(d)	fraud (contrary to section 1 of the Fraud Act 2006).”Licensing Act 2003 (c. 17)34 In Schedule 4 (personal licence: relevant offences), after paragraph 20 insert— “21	An offence under the Fraud Act 2006.”Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act 2004 (c. 19)35 (1) In section 14(2) (offences giving rise to immigration officer's power of arrest), omit paragraph “ (g)(ii) ” and “ (iii) ”, in paragraph “ (h) ”, “ 15, 16 ” and paragraphs(i) and (j).(2) After section 14(2)(h) insert—“(ha)	an offence under either of the following provisions of the Fraud Act 2006—(i) section 1 (fraud);(ii) section 11 (obtaining services dishonestly),”.(i) 
Fraud Act 2006 (c. 35)	15SCHEDULE 2 – Transitional provisions and savingsDocument Generated: 2024-05-18Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Fraud Act 2006. (See end of Document for details)Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15)36 In section 76 (financial reporting orders: making), in subsection (3), for paragraphs(a) and (b) substitute—“(aa)	an offence under either of the following provisions of the Fraud Act 2006—(i) section 1 (fraud),(ii) section 11 (obtaining services dishonestly),”.37 In section 78 (financial reporting orders: making in Northern Ireland), in subsection (3), for paragraphs (a) and (b) substitute—“(aa)	an offence under either of the following provisions of the Fraud Act 2006—(i) section 1 (fraud),(ii) section 11 (obtaining services dishonestly),”.Gambling Act 2005 (c. 19)38 After paragraph 3 of Schedule 7 (relevant offences) insert— “3A	An offence under the Fraud Act 2006.”SCHEDULE 2	Section 14(2)TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS AND SAVINGSMaximum term of imprisonment for offences under this Act1 In relation to an offence committed before [F132 May 2022], the references to [F14the general limit in a magistrates’ court] in sections 1(3)(a), 6(2)(a), 7(2)(a), 9(6)(a) and 11(3)(a) are to be read as references to 6 months.Increase in penalty for fraudulent trading2 Section 10 does not affect the penalty for any offence committed before that section comes into force.Abolition of deception offences3 (1) Paragraph 1 of Schedule 1 does not affect any liability, investigation, legal proceeding or penalty for or in respect of any offence partly committed before the commencement of that paragraph.1 
16	Fraud Act 2006 (c. 35)SCHEDULE 2 – Transitional provisions and savingsDocument Generated: 2024-05-18Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Fraud Act 2006. (See end of Document for details)(2) An offence is partly committed before the commencement of paragraph 1 of Schedule 1 if—(a) a relevant event occurs before its commencement, and(b) another relevant event occurs on or after its commencement.(3) “Relevant event”, in relation to an offence, means any act, omission or other event (including any result of one or more acts or omissions) proof of which is required for conviction of the offence.Scope of offences relating to stolen goods under the Theft Act 1968 (c. 60)4 Nothing in paragraph 6 of Schedule 1 affects the operation of section 24 of the Theft Act 1968 in relation to goods obtained in the circumstances described in section 15(1) of that Act where the obtaining is the result of a deception made before the commencement of that paragraph.Dishonestly retaining a wrongful credit under the Theft Act 19685 Nothing in paragraph 7 of Schedule 1 affects the operation of section 24A(7) and(8) of the Theft Act 1968 in relation to credits falling within section 24A(3) or (4) of that Act and made before the commencement of that paragraph. Scope of offences relating to stolen goods under the Theft Act (Northern Ireland) 1969 (c. 16 (N.I.))6 Nothing in paragraph 11 of Schedule 1 affects the operation of section 23 of the Theft Act (Northern Ireland) 1969 in relation to goods obtained in the circumstances described in section 15(1) of that Act where the obtaining is the result of a deception made before the commencement of that paragraph.Dishonestly retaining a wrongful credit under the Theft Act (Northern Ireland) 19697 Nothing in paragraph 12 of Schedule 1 affects the operation of section 23A(7) and(8) of the Theft Act (Northern Ireland) 1969 in relation to credits falling within section 23A(3) or (4) of that Act and made before the commencement of that paragraph.Limitation periods under the Limitation Act 1980 (c. 58)8 Nothing in paragraph 18 of Schedule 1 affects the operation of section 4 of the Limitation Act 1980 in relation to chattels obtained in the circumstances described in section 15(1) of the Theft Act 1968 where the obtaining is a result of a deception made before the commencement of that paragraph.Limitation periods under the Limitation (Northern Ireland) Order 1989 (S.I. 1989/1339 (N.I. 11))9 Nothing in paragraph 22 of Schedule 1 affects the operation of Article 18 of the Limitation (Northern Ireland) Order 1989 in relation to chattels obtained in the circumstances described in section 15(1) of the Theft Act (Northern Ireland) 1969 where the obtaining is a result of a deception made before the commencement of that paragraph.1 
Fraud Act 2006 (c. 35)	17SCHEDULE 3 – Repeals and revocationsDocument Generated: 2024-05-18Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Fraud Act 2006. (See end of Document for details)Scheduled offences under the Terrorism Act 2000 (c. 11)10 Nothing in paragraph 30 of Schedule 1 affects the operation of Part 7 of the Terrorism Act 2000 in relation to an offence under section 15(1) of the Theft Act (Northern Ireland) 1969 where the obtaining is a result of a deception made before the commencement of that paragraph.Powers of arrest under Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act 2004 (c. 19)11 (1) Nothing in paragraph 35 of Schedule 1 affects the power of arrest conferred by section 14 of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act 2004 in relation to an offence partly committed before the commencement of that paragraph.(2) An offence is partly committed before the commencement of paragraph 35 of Schedule 1 if—(a) a relevant event occurs before its commencement, and(b) another relevant event occurs on or after its commencement.(3) “Relevant event”, in relation to an offence, means any act, omission or other event (including any result of one or more acts or omissions) proof of which is required for conviction of the offence.SCHEDULE 3	Section 14(3)REPEALS AND REVOCATIONSTitle and number	Extent of repeal or revocationTheft Act 1968 (c. 60)	Sections 15, 15A, 15B and 16.In section 18(1), “15, 16 or”.Section 20(2).In section 20(3), “ “deception” has the same meaning as in section 15 of this Act, and”. Section 24A(3) and (4).In section 25(5), “, and “cheat” means an offence under section 15 of this Act”.
Theft Act (Northern Ireland) 1969 (c. 16 (N.I.))
Sections 15, 15A, 15B and 16.Section 19(2).In section 19(3), “ “deception” has the same meaning as in section 15, and”.Section 23A(3) and (4).In section 24(5), “, and “cheat” means an offence under section 15”.
Theft Act 1978 (c. 31)	Sections 1 and 2. Section 4(2)(a). Section 5(1).
Theft (Northern Ireland) Order 1978 (S.I. 1978/1407 (N.I. 23))
Articles 3 and 4. Article 6(2)(a). Article 7(1).
18	Fraud Act 2006 (c. 35)SCHEDULE 3 – Repeals and revocationsDocument Generated: 2024-05-18Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Fraud Act 2006. (See end of Document for details)Nuclear Material (Offences) Act 1983 (c. 18) In section 1(1)(d), “15 or” (in both places). Criminal Justice Act 1993 (c. 36)	In section 1(2), the entries in paragraph (a)relating to sections 15, 15A, 16 and 20(2) of the Theft Act 1968.Section 1(2)(b).Theft (Amendment) Act 1996 (c. 62)	Sections 1, 3(2) and 4.
Criminal Justice (Northern Ireland) Order 1996 (S.I. 1996/3160 (N.I. 24))Theft (Amendment) (Northern Ireland) Order 1997 (S.I. 1997/277 (N.I. 3))
In Article 38(2), the entries in sub- paragraph (a) relating to sections 15, 15A, 16 and 19(2) of the Theft Act (Northern Ireland) 1969.Article 38(2)(b). Articles 3, 5(2) and 6.
Terrorism Act 2000 (c. 11)	In Schedule 9, paragraph 10(e).In Schedule 12, in paragraph 12(1), “(within the meaning of section 15(4) of the Theft Act (Northern Ireland) 1969)”.
Criminal Justice and Court Services Act 2000 (c. 43)Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act 2004 (c. 19)
In Schedule 6, in paragraph 1, the entry relating to section 15 of the Theft Act 1968.In section 14(2), paragraph (g)(ii) and (iii), in paragraph (h), “15, 16” and paragraphs (i) and (j).

Fraud Act 2006 (c. 35)	19Document Generated: 2024-05-18
Browse
Search ?  Publish ?
? Login | Register	?
Policing and Society ?An International Journal of Research and PolicyLatest Articles
This Journal  ?Advanced search
Submit an article Journal homepage
606Views0CrossRef citations to date3Altmetric
?? Listen ?Research ArticleSearching for a needle in a haystack? An exploratory study into the policing of ‘needle spiking’ in the UKNicole Westmarland ? & Melanie McCarryReceived 29 Mar 2024, Accepted 30 Jan 2025, Published online: 10 Feb 2025? Cite this article ? https://doi.org/10.1080/10439463.2025.2462742
Open access
? Full Article ? Figures & data ? References ? Citations ? Metrics ? Licensing ? Reprints & Permissions	? Share
In this articleABSTRACT
? View PDF  View EPUBABSTRACT
Related research ?People also Recommended Cited by
IntroductionResearch approachOverall patterns from the FOI dataNeedle spikings were rarely perpetrated as a ‘gateway crime’ to another criminal o!enceNeedle spiking was not restricted to young women – men were also targetedDisbelief in victim’s
In autumn 2021 social media posts about ‘needle’ spiking – the injecting of a person with drugs without their consent – began to circulate in the UK. This research supplements media articles and o!cial documents with new empirical data (885 incidents from 32 police forces obtained via Freedom of Information requests and "ve interviews with victims). The purpose of the article is to document what is known about needle spiking in order to improve responses. The FOI data showed that there was a peak in reported incidents in October and November 2021, that the most frequent location of the needle stick injury was the arm (followed by the leg), and that while three quarters of the incidents took place in a pub, bar or club, needle spiking was not exclusively a night-time economy problem. Needle spikings were rarely perpetrated as a ‘gateway crime’ to commit another criminal o#ence such as sexual assault, it was not restricted only to young women, and victims faced disbelief from a number of directions including some parts of the media and police. Few drugs were identi"ed (mamba, insulin and cocaine) but problems with forensic testing exist, meaning that greater emphasis on other forms of evidence collection is required. We propose that greater multi-agency working is required to tackle needle-spiking as there are overlapping needs in terms of needle (and other forms) of spiking relating to health and policing. More research is needed, particularly on o#ender motivations to fully understand and respond to the problem of spiking.? KEYWORDS: Spiking drugs night-time economy gender-based violence
read
articlesView more
? Previous article	View latest articles	Next article ?IntroductionThe administering of drugs (including alcohol) or poison to someone without their consent (in a non-medical capacity) is known as ‘spiking’. In England, it is illegal under a range of legislation, including the administering of poison under s. 23 and 24 of the O#ences Against the Person Act 1861 and the administering of a substance with the intent to overpower a person under s. 61 of the Sexual O#ences Act 2003, and punishable by up to ten years in prison. The current framework has been criticised for using archaic language (Home O!ce 2023) and for not failing to re$ect the intrusion on personal autonomy that spiking constitutes (Marks 2024). New legislation which will introduce an updated, single o#ence of spiking is being developed at the time of writing.Despite having little attention from criminologists, spiking is a widespread crime that can have serious and long-term impacts on victims (Burrell et al. 2023). According to the National Police Chief’s Council in the UK, the police receive an average of 561 reports of spiking per month – and they acknowledge this is an under-recorded crime making the actual "gures likely higher (NPCC 2024). A spiking survey was conducted across three universities in the US (Swan et al. 2017), and found that one in 13 students (7.8%, 462/6,064) students said they had experienced being drugged (spiked). In addition, 83 students said they had drugged someone or knew someone who had drugged someone on 172 occasions. Female students were more likely to report negative outcomes including sexual assault and physical ill health and one participant choked on their own vomit and went on to require CPR on their way to hospital (Swan et al.  2017). Spiking is not con"ned to students though. The largest UK study found a similar rate of spiking in a nationally representative general population study of 1693 adults conducted by YouGov in 2021. In total, they found that 8% of participants said that they had had a drink spiked (6% of men and 11% of women).Most consumables can be spiked, including food and cigarettes, but it is drinks that are thought to be most often spiked and it is drink spiking that has received the most attention. This changed suddenly and unexpectedly in the UK in autumn 2021, when the news media began reporting on a seemingly new phenomenon of ‘needle spiking’ that was being talked about on social media.‘Needle spiking’ or ‘injection spiking’ refers to the administering of drugs or poison without consent via a syringe directly into a person’s body rather than by a drink or other consumable. Some of the earliest social media accounts were made by female students in Nottingham reporting they felt unwell for reasons they could not explain, su#ered memory loss and suspected they might have been spiked (BBC 2021a). Some of these reports referred to speci"c pain in a limb, a pinprick type mark on their skin and reports of feeling a scratch just before feeling unwell (Ng 2021, BBC  2021b). Around the same time, and in the weeks that followed, multiple reports were made from students at other universities across the UK including the Universities of Glasgow and Edinburgh. In response, students in Scotland set up ‘Girls Night In, Edinburgh’ which proposed a boycott of night time economy venues for one date in October to raise awareness of the problem, stating:The purpose of this boycott is to bring attention to the severity of the situation and to encourage you all to take this seriously and do everything within your power and means to prevent these heinous spiking incidents to the best of your ability. (Open letter from Girls Night In – Edinburgh and the community of Edinburgh, 20 October 2021 in Brown and Bryan  2021)As awareness spread, more accounts were shared, and it became clear that the problem was not con"ned to female students – with male students and members of the public starting to make similar reports. By 31 July 2022 there had been 2065 needle spiking incidents recorded by the police in England and Wales (comparable "gures not made available from Scotland or Northern Ireland), and a national police operation launched (Operation Lester), a Home A#airs Committee inquiry conducted, a Department for Education working group established, and guidance sent to all Vice Chancellors from Universities UK (Westmarland, 2022). The statement ‘Myth: Needle spiking isn’t real’ is now included on the Metropolitan Police Website (‘Spiking Myths’, https://www.met.police.uk/advice/advice-and-information/spiking-advice/spiking/spiking- myths/#Needle) and the Government factsheet about spiking now includes ‘injecting someone with prescription or illegal drugs without their knowledge’. (https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/spiking-factsheet/spiking-factsheet). The Global Drugs Survey which asked about spiking in 22 countries found that nearly one in twenty (4.2%) of those who suspected they had been spiked said they thought this was using an injection (Davies et al. 2024). Three in ten (29.5%) people completing a survey of Berlin night time economy users reported having high or very high levels of fear that they would be spiked via a needle, with this "gure being higher for women than for men (Bendau et al., 2023)As awareness of this problem arose quickly and unexpectedly, this article brings together information from di#erent sources and analyses new empirical data (FOI data and a small number of victim interviews), supplemented by media commentary and o!cial responses including a Parliamentary Inquiry. Due to extremely limited existing research on needle spiking (a review of 87 articles on spiking by Burrell et al. (2023) found only one reference to needle spiking in one article) this paper is presented in an exploratory style – bringing together a picture of what happened rather than in a traditional journal article layout. As feminist social scientists teaching students about violence and abuse, we were being educated about this emerging problem from our own students in ‘real time’ as they described to us what they were seeing on a night out. In turn, we attempted to research the problem in real time to understand what was happening. The purpose of the article is to document what is known about needle spiking and to identify how this might improve policing and research on spiking in the UK. We describe the research approach "rst, then outline what we learnt about the nature and extent of the problem from both our empirical data and from the supplementary sources. We then present our "ndings framed as "ndings that could be taken forward in considering new research and police responses to all forms of spiking.Research approachTwo research methods were used to collect the empirical data. First, we used Freedom of Information requests to identify the nature and extent of needle spiking reported to UK police forces. Second, we used interviews to explore the experiences of people who suspected they had been a victim of needle spiking. The empirical data collection was supplemented by information coming from a Parliamentary Inquiry and from "rst person narratives published in social or mainstream media. As additional context, but not used as data, our analysis is also informed by the "rst author's (Westmarland) advisory position on the Department for Education Spiking Working Group and her work with the College of Policing on rapid drug testing kits. Ethical approval was granted by Durham University Department of Sociology Research Ethics Committee.Freedom of Information requests have increased in popularity over the last "ve years as a relatively low-cost criminological research method (Westmarland and Bows  2019). We sent a Freedom of Information request to all UK police forces – 49 in total: the 43 territorial forces in England and Wales, the two national police forces in Scotland and Northern Ireland, and four specialist police forces (British Transport Police, Civil Nuclear Constabulary, Ministry of Defence Police and Port of Dover Police). There were two parts to the request; the "rst part asked for the number of needle spiking reports they had received in the months of September, October, November and December in 2021 compared to the same months in the four previous years (the numbers were negligible in previous years so are not reported in this analysis). 33 of the 49 forces supplied us with this information or part of this information, including four nil returns (a response rate of 66%). The total number of incidents was 875. The second part of the request asked for more detail about the incidents. We asked for victim sex, suspect sex, whether the suspect was known to the victim, the location of the incident, whether any other allegations were made alongside the needle spiking, which drugs had been identi"ed, the location of the needle wound, and whether a suspect had been identi"ed, charged and/or outcome known. 27 of the 50 forces (a response rate of 54%) responded to this part of the request, giving us information about 489 incidents, although there were high levels of missing data for some variables. After data collation and cleaning in Microsoft Excel, frequencies were calculated.Five telephone interviews were conducted by the "rst author (Westmarland) to understand the experiences of those who had been needle spiked. Participants were self-selecting from across England and Wales and were recruited through social media. Four participants were women, and one was a man (Participant 2). Four of the "ve participants were university students. Respondents were asked to explain, in their own words, what had happened to them and were encouraged to go at their own speed and tell their own experience in the way that suited them. Prompts included asking about responses from the police, from any medical professionals they had sought help from, and from their university if relevant. Referrals to support services were made at the end of the interview where needed. Several interviewees thanked us for the opportunity to tell their story and to feel believed and have their experience validated – sometimes for the "rst time. Given the small number of interviews, they are treated as individual case studies rather than attempting any form of thematic analysis. The number of interviews is small – in part because the study received no external funding due to the speed at which the problem and opportunity for data collection started and in part because they were designed to add additional depth to the FOI rather than to develop conclusions in themselves. However, they do constitute the only interviews with needle spiking victims in academic research to date.Overall patterns from the FOI dataDespite some di#erences in how police forces searched their recording systems for the needle spiking incidents in response to our request, the reporting pattern they followed as a whole data set was fairly consistent. 25 police forces provided the number of recorded incidents broken down by the month requested. From an extremely low base rate in September 2021, the overall pattern was a rapid increase in needle spiking in October, with the increase continuing into November 2021 for the majority of forces, before a reduction in December that same year. This was substantially higher than for the same months in previous years. We do not name individual forces here as the purpose is to show the pattern across the autumn/winter months, rather than to show which forces had ‘more’ or ‘less’. It is also important to note that some of the largest forces, including the Metropolitan Police, Police Scotland and the location that saw the "rst recorded case – Nottinghamshire – all failed to supply data despite a number of follow ups. Hence, it is the pattern (a sudden increase for October and November followed by a reduction in December) not the overall number of recorded incidents (which is certainly a substantial undercount) that is relevant here (Figure 1).Figure 1. Number of incidents by month and year.Display full sizeThe location of the needle stick injury was recorded in 309 incidents. The most frequently recorded location was an arm (the injury location in 127 incidents, 41% of the 309 incidents where injury location was recorded). Next most frequent were leg (85 incidents, 28%), back (25 incidents, 8%), hand (21 incidents, 7%) shoulder (15 incidents, 5%) and buttock (14 incidents, 5%). Also recorded but for under ten incidents each were hip, wrist, groin, stomach and neck.Spiking victims do not always know where they were at when the spiking happened. This means there are some limitations to location data. This was also the case for some of the victims we interviewed, although some had clearer recollections:Basically, I’d been out on an afternoon with two other couples, we went to a bar to celebrate someone’s 50th. We’d been there an hour, maybe an hour and a half and I bumped into someone when I walked out of the toilets, and clearly they had spiked me with a syringe. Within 10-15 minutes I had collapsed, this is at 6pm on a Saturday afternoon. I went outside and collapsed again, and then went from bad to worse. That’s what I can remember. (Participant 2)For those incidents where there was some recollection or suspicion about where the incident had taken place, a pub, bar or club was the most common venue (the location of 240 incidents – 75% of the 321 incidents where the venue was recorded). However, not all took place in busy nightlife venues, with a number of o#ences taking place at a residential (including university) address (61 incidents, 19%), on the street (14 incidents, 4%) on a train (4 incidents, 1%) or at a live music event (2 incidents, > 1%). As with previous caveats, it is important to note that di#erent police forces recorded locations in di#erent ways, and that victims did not always know where the incident had taken place, so this should be considered a general pattern and understood with that limitation. The takeaway point here is that while most incidents happened in pubs, bars and clubs, needle spiking is not exclusively a night time economy problem. This echoes "ndings from research on other forms of spiking (Swan et al. 2017, Burrell et al. 2023).These "ndings show that needle spiking followed a pattern of reporting across England and Wales, that a wide range of places on the body were suspected as being spiked by a syringe, and that although most incidents took place within the night time economy, this was not exclusively the case.Needle spikings were rarely perpetrated as a ‘gateway crime’ to another criminal offenceUntil now, research on spiking in the UK has focused almost exclusively on spiking as a means to committing other o#ences, particularly rape and serious sexual o#ences. While drug facilitated sexual assault undoubtedly requires research, looking at spiking only through the sexual assault lens has limited our understandings and excluded other possibilities, such as ‘for a laugh/for fun’ (McPherson  2007, Swan et al. 2017). Research in the UK and internationally shows that the most frequently detected substance in drug facilitated sexual assault is alcohol rather than ‘date rape drugs’ (Gee et al.  2006, Anderson et al.  2017). Looking at spiking only through the lens of sexual assault is a problem for a number of reasons. First, it is not always the case ‘date rape’ drugs are used. The ‘Black Cab rapist’ John Worboys spiked glasses of champagne with sleeping tablets before sexually assaulting his female passengers. He was convicted in 2009 of 12 cases, but the number of reports exceeded 100 (Siddique 2021). The second problem is that it assumes that there will always be a follow on, ‘more serious’ o#ence than spiking. This may imply that the spiking o#ence does not warrant a full investigation in itself, despite its seriousness. This was how one victim we spoke to was made to feel, despite experiencing a secondary o#ence of serious sexual assault, when she tried to report the spiking:The whole ordeal was horrible. I don’t want to badmouth the police or the NHS, but the police were really quite rude to me - unnecessarily rude - they said if you’re not going to talk to us about the assault, then there’s not much point speaking to us. (Participant 5)The other four participants had no secondary o#ences that they were aware of (bearing in mind memory loss and confusion is a symptom of spiking), and they had all spent time trying to work out what possible potential motivations the perpetrator may have had for targeting them. Two participants wondered whether the spiking in their cases could have been a homophobic hate crime, but the sample is too small to draw any conclusions.The FOI data in our study showed that secondary o#ending was relatively rare. This "nding was consistent across the forces. Most often, the listed o#ences (178 incidents had a criminal o#ence recorded) were linked directly to the needle spiking itself. In other words, spiking was the primary and sole o#ence – spiking was not used as a gateway to commit a di#erent type of crime. Assault was the most frequently used o#ence type – usually at the level of ABH (actual bodily harm) or the more serious GBH (grievous bodily harm) (117 incidents, 66% of the 178 incidents where an o#ence type was recorded). This contrasts with what we might see for drink spiking – since there is a physical injury with a needle in this form of spiking, it opens up the opportunity for assault charges to be brought. The next most frequent o#ence type was the ‘administering of poison’, including ‘to administer poison so as to endanger life’, ‘administer poison with intent to injure or annoy’ and ‘administer poison with intent to commit sexual assault’ (42 incidents, 24%). In the small number of linked o#ences that were recorded beyond the spiking itself, these were sexual o#ences (in 13 incidents, 7%), theft (5 incidents, 3%) and criminal damage (1 incident, > 1%).Hence, while there was some secondary o#ending, and some of these were sexual o#ences, looking at needle spiking only through the lens of rape and serious sexual o#ences closes o# other possibilities in understanding the motivations and intentions behind needle spiking. The question of why these o#ences are being committed has not been explored, and the low number of identi"ed perpetrators makes researching perpetrator motives almost impossible. Government enquiries in both England and Wales and in Scotland have concluded that spiking motives remain unknown and there is a need for research:We are not always able to determine the reasons why a perpetrator carries out an assault in this way, and it may not always be for a sexual purpose. It can put people at signi"cant risk of harm. (Assistant Chief Constable Judi Heaton, Police Scotland, Oct 2021, giving evidence to the Education, Young People and Children Committee)The motivations of spiking o#enders remain unclear, particularly around the newly identi"ed incidences of needle spiking, and that the lack of understanding limits our ability to e#ectively tackle spiking through targeted interventions. (Government response to the House of Commons Home A#airs Committee 2022b, p. 8)Our FOI data has shown that in the case of needle spiking, assault and poisoning o#ences were recorded as being the primary and sole o#ence type in most incidents where a crime was recorded. Although there were some additional o#ences reported, these were in the minority. Future research and criminal investigations should be more open to motives other than rape and serious sexual o#ences and treat needle spiking as a form of assault or poisoning in its own right. Greater intelligence about perpetrator motives is essential to gain a fuller understanding of the problem, to identify perpetrators, and to develop crime disruption-based interventions. The planned introduction of spiking as a single criminal o#ence in England and Wales may help with this as it will make it more straightforward to research (police reported) spiking through the criminal justice system.Needle spiking was not restricted to young women – men were also targetedAs described earlier, some of the "rst reports of needle spiking on social media were mainly from young women students, many of which were dismissed as being young women who could not ‘handle their alcohol’ as the night time economy began to reopen after COVID-19 lockdown restrictions. Drink spiking has also traditionally been seen as a ‘young women’s problem’, with devices such as ‘spikey’s’ (plastic bottle stoppers) and hair scrunchie drink covers being marketed at this demographic. However, men have been spiked using so called ‘date rape’ drugs in some of the most high-pro"le serial rape cases in the UK against men – such as Reynhard Sinaga who was convicted in 2020 for using GHB to drug 48 men before he raped them (with the investigation team "nding evidence linking over 190 potential victims to him) (Greater Manchester Police 2020). GHB was also used by serial killer Stephen Port when he spiked and murdered four men in 2014.As mentioned earlier, the largest spiking prevalence study in the UK asked only about drink spiking not needle or other forms of spiking and found that 6% of men and 11% of women said they suspected that they had had their drink spiked (YouGov 2021). Participants were also asked how con"dent they were that they would be believed if they said someone had spiked their drink. Participants felt most con"dent that they would be believed by family (82% fairly or very con"dent) and friends (81% fairly or very con"dent). However, only 43% were fairly or very con"dent that they would be believed if they reported it to the police and only 29% were fairly or very con"dent that they would be believed if they reported it to the venue/place where their drink was spiked.The sex di#erences were interesting – with men being more con"dent than women that they would be believed if they told the police or the venue/place where their drink was spiked, whilst women were more con"dent than men they would be believed if they told their friends or their family (YouGov 2021).The FOI data in our study showed that both women and men were recorded as being victimised, although women were disproportionately targeted. For the 437 incidents where sex was recorded, 374 victims (86%) were women and 63 (14%) were men. There was a very small number of suspects identi"ed – just 25 – and all of these were recorded as being men. Therefore, we would describe the problem as being gendered in that the suspected perpetrators were men and the majority of victims were women but would also note that it is important to recognise that this is not only a problem for ‘young, drunk women’. This is important in the next section which addresses the lack of belief in victims’ testimonies of needle spiking.Disbelief in victim’s testimoniesWhile there were some media reports that treated victim’s testimonies in a respectful manner, the primary narrative when needle spikings started to be reported was that spiking could not be happening and that it was a case of young women who could not handle their alcohol coming out of COVID-19 lockdowns. News reports pointed to the lack of arrests, the lack of identi"ed drugs, and used expert voices on drugs as their evidence to why needle spiking could not be happening and that it was ‘fake news’.Various newspapers took this approach, such as the 2021 Mail on Sunday (20.11.21) article which was headlined Did all those nightclub needle attacks actually never happen?. This article reported: It’s an uncomfortable truth, not least for the young women who sincerely believe that they are victims, but it’s entirely possible that there is no epidemic of needle spiking. And that what is taking place is in our heads (no page numbers). This news article, written by a criminologist, refutes the reality of needle spiking through reference to his ‘friends’ who believe women simply imagine that they have been spiked. In conclusion the author, Waiton, states that needle spiking is actually victim-feminism and a ‘very modern form of bigotry [against men]’ (no page numbers).Similarly, a 2021 article for The Herald, entitled Spiking by injection: Experts say scenario is ‘far- fetched’ repeats this dismissal of victim’s accounts:Experts have said that a sudden spate of women being spiked by injection is ‘far- fetched’ and ‘deeply improbable’ due to the di!culties involved with using a syringe on someone against their will […] experts say the scenario is unlikely as it is almost impossible to administer the type of drugs needed to render someone unconscious without that person noticing, and could only be carried out by someone with a very specialised set of skills. (Harrison 2021, no page numbers)Our interviews with victims of needle spiking spoke of a lack of belief by some they told. Although this was a small, self-selecting sample, and their negative experiences might have motivated them to speak to researchers, this "nding is in line with other documented experiences of victims speaking out via social media and some mainstream media. One participant told us the reaction from security at the club where she had been needle spiked:The "rst time we went back a few weeks afterwards, I said the last time I was there I was needle spiked. And the doorman said we were liars and we hadn’t been. Then I started getting upset at being called a liar, and then the manager came out and said ‘yes she was needle spiked’. They said it had happened - but the CCTV now had been wiped. (Participant 4)Participant 5 got a mixed reaction when she reported needle spiking to the police, with all but one police o!cer doubting her story. One male o!cer told her If you hadn’t been out for three months, you probably just weren’t used to the alcohol. Another told her Yeah that’s not a spike mark, it’s just a spot. After getting upset about not being believed, a female o!cer did reassure her and blamed or excused the o!cer’s comment about the spot on his age, suggesting that his attitude was outdated: The policewoman said ‘He’s old. If you think you’ve been spiked, then they will take it seriously. However, overall, the impact of the earlier comments had been for Participant 5 to feel disbelieved, and this compounded the harm she experienced. She concluded Basically, no one really took me seriously, and it made me feel worse about it all.In place of victim disbelief, time and attention could more usefully be placed on developing how evidence could be gathered to support (or indeed not support) victim testimony. This could include consideration of: how CCTV evidence could be improved, retained and used; how victim interviews could be better conducted to achieve best evidence; and the use of timely forensic medical examinations including photography of any needle stick injuries.Limitations of evidential drug testing for spikingOne of the reasons given by those sceptical that needle spiking was happening was the lack of identi"ed drugs in people’s bodies. The lack of con"rmatory toxicology reports was generally interpreted as evidence that needle spiking was not happening (such as in the Waiton 2021 article) rather than potential limitations of drug testing accuracy and availability. In another case, a student at Aberdeen University reported being needle spiked to Police Scotland but was ‘dismissed’ by o!cers and ‘was told there was nothing o!cers could do because she had not had blood samples taken – and so there was no proof she had been spiked’ (Allen 2021, no page numbers).In our FOI data, there were indeed a very small number of drugs identi"ed (however this may have increased as more results may have come back outside of the research period and/or as testing protocols improved over time). At the time of responding to our request, just 7 incidents had drugs identi"ed in our sample. The 7 incidents related to three drugs: mamba (a form of synthetic cannabinoid), insulin and cocaine.In our interview data, there were examples of participants being passed between health and police for blood testing, and of delays to forensic tests being taken. Sometimes these were policing delays, and some were due to a time delay between falling ill and the participant suspecting they had been spiked.Our data is only from the "rst few months of the needle spiking, and testing regimes did get more organised over time. For example, the National Police Chief’s Council launched ‘Operation Lester’ to gain national intelligence and provide a more coordinated forensic testing regime for all forms of spiking. In addition, some night time economy venues sourced their own testing kits including rapid testing kits for drinks (Westmarland,  2022). However, there remains signi"cant issues using existing drug testing methods as a way of ‘proving’ spiking.Many of these issues were explored in the Home A#airs Committee report on Spiking (House of Commons 2022a). They highlighted the lack of, and delays in, forensic testing in (all forms of) spiking cases. Giving evidence to the review, Dr Adrian Boyle (Vice President of The Royal College of Emergency Medicine) stated that health settings are not always able to test samples in a way which is admissible in a court of law and that police should take forensic samples:Victims are often ping-ponged between the health service and the police, who told us they have insu!cient forensic testing capacity and that late reporting reduces the viable testing window. (House of Commons Home A#airs Committee  2022a, p. 3)We also saw examples of this ‘ping ponging’ between health and criminal justice in our interviews, which we discuss later in this article in terms of the need for a more joined up multi-agency approach to a multi-agency problem.There exists strong evidence that delays to drug testing impact on con"rmatory toxicology reports, as a systematic review of the toxicology of drug-facilitated sexual assault (DFSA), demonstrated:As was mentioned in nearly all studies in this review, it is likely that current prevalence rates are under-estimated due to limited toxicological results of samples provided after a lengthy delay following the suspected DFSA. A delay of even 12 h can impede the detection of fast metabolising substances, such as alcohol and GHB. (Anderson et al.2017, p. 53)Given the existing known problems in gaining timely toxicology reports for spiking generally, the victims’ experiences in our study, and the low number of drugs con"rmed in our FOI sample, we concur with the recommendations from the House of Commons Home A#airs Committee (2022b) that a rapid forensic testing service should be developed to ensure timely provision of forensic testing which is admissible as evidence in court. We also further emphasise that it is important that the limitations of testing are made clear to both victims and to professionals who are responding (Westmarland, 2022). Taylor et al. (2004, p. xiv) argued in relation to drink spiking that:In the absence of evidence, it should be assumed that incidents do occur while we move to build a comprehensive database and improve the coordination between relevant agencies relating to forensic procedures.We propose that this approach should also be followed for needle and other forms of spiking.Need to improve evidence collection for the identiﬁcation of suspectsGiven the known limitations of evidential drug testing for spiking, it follows that broader evidence collection is important. We do not have any FOI data on additional evidence collected, however all
"ve of our small sample of interviewees reported negative experiences of trying to report whathad happened to them. Four out of "ve attempted to make a police report. The "fth did not attempt to report to the police having previously had a negative experience with the police. One of the criticisms made about police responses was the lack of timely evidence collection. In particular, the late timing of collecting forensic samples and CCTV was criticised:I reported it to the police both [force name] and [force name]. They’ve done absolutely nothing … I don’t think the police have a grip on it. I think its new to them, but this was a club with 38 high-de"nition cameras, it’s a very small club, you could have picked it out dead easy, and now it’s all deleted and gone. The case is now closed believe it or not. (Participant 2)The response o!cer took a full statement, and the person in charge of our case took urine samples. But that was far too late, it was "ve days later. They tried to send a photographer but they sent the photographer too late and the needle hole had closed up. (Participant 4)When listing the evidence she thought could have been collected, one participant exclaimed at the end: I feel like we could solve it quicker than they are! (Participant 3)As noted earlier, this is a small, self-selecting sample of victims who may have had disproportionately negative experiences in reporting to the police. However, we also note that there is a heavy emphasis across the media, academic research and parliamentary committees about forensic drug testing as evidence. Given the limitations outlined above (some of which cannot be quickly resolved), we propose that greater emphasis and research on broader forms of evidence collection would be useful such as those suggested earlier in the article and as called for by the Home O!ce (2023).A multi-agency problem: the need to coordinate health and policing responses better on a local and national scaleOne of the problems linked to evidence collection is that victims often require immediate medical attention. The victims we spoke to told us about health problems similar to those reported by other needle spiking victims speaking out on social media. All described feeling extremely ill – I’ve never felt as ill in my life as Participant 2 described it – and having memory loss, and in some cases collapsing. Some also experienced vomiting:I was sick that night when I got back, in bed, and I urinated myself as well in bed. (Participant 4)Disturbed vision was also described. Participant 1 described it as ‘everything was just black’ even though she had her eyes open. Participant 5 described her vision being blurred, similar to the start of a migraine, and another described it as:I felt like I couldn’t see, obviously I could see as I was walking around, but I felt like I couldn’t. (Participant 3)Some participants felt that the hospital had not fully understood what spiking was or have a procedure to follow in terms of liaising with the police:At the hospital – they took my blood, they didn’t do anything they just kept them, they didn’t know what they were doing. The Dr couldn’t understand what the idea of spiking was, I had to explain it to her for about 20 minutes. (Participant 3)I went to the hospital, in [name of town] and they weren’t interested at all. I’ve just found the whole scenario I "nd myself in frightening. I went to the NHS emergency walk in, I said ‘a few days ago I was spiked with a syringe in the side of my body’ and they said ‘no we don’t do that, we don’t do that here.’ They said ‘do you have any other injuries?’ They said ‘Oh well if you want to hang around I’ll have a look at the bruise for you.’ (Participant 2)Participant 2 had been hoping in attending the walk in to obtain PEP – post-exposure prophylaxis for HIV – as he was concerned that the injection he was spiked with may not have been clean. He then went to the sexual health clinic and his General Practitioner. However, the only thing he was able to obtain was a HIV test that could be done three months after the incident and was told he did not meet the criteria for PEP.We agree with Blandamer et al. (2023) that there needs to be greater consideration on responses from a healthcare perspective. They argue that e!cient testing will improve a coordinated response and ‘information sharing between Eds [emergency departments], public health bodies and the police. This could potentially enhance police and healthcare responses, particularly to injection spiking, given the current paucity of data’ (Blandamer et al. 2023, p. 4).The health impacts were not limited to short term acute problems. In the weeks and months following the needle spiking, participants spoke longer term health impacts linked to anxiety, as demonstrated in these examples:I’m not the same person now. I’m very cautious about going into bars and clubs. I had a birthday party, but I’ve not had a drink of alcohol since. I’m very subdued. Very quiet. (Participant 2)I had a panic attack and couldn’t breathe … the "rst time I walked past the clubs on the high street I had an anxiety attack. (Participant 3)Most of the media coverage and national responses have been focused on criminal justice, and speci"cally on policing of spiking. However, there are clear overlapping needs from needle (and other forms of) spiking in terms of health and criminal justice. Greater multi-agency working is required both on practical and strategic fronts, at a local and national level to respond in a multi- agency way to a multi-agency problem.ConclusionsThis research has joined together existing research, media articles and government documents along with new empirical data to o#er new knowledge about needle spiking. In paying attention to the new form of spiking using needles, debates about how we respond to drink spiking have also been reignited. To date, spiking has not been given the priority it deserves in terms of policing, healthcare, or academic research – in part because it has too often been approached only through the lens of drug facilitated sexual assault. This research is the "rst to have included detail about needle spikings reported to the police for example where on the body the victim suspected they were spiked, the suspected location that the incident took place, and the sex of the victim and also the "rst to include victim’s voices directly. However, the qualitative sample size is small ("ve victims) and the police data was extracted soon after the problem emerged – policing recording and responses are likely to have improved after this initial period. It is hoped that this exploratory research can be built upon to support greater multi-agency working, including improved victim care pathways within and between the police and health services. Multi-disciplinary research is needed to improve responses to victims and understand more about o#ender motives – although the latter will require some methodological innovation. There will be new research opportunities when the planned introduction of spiking as a standalone criminal o#ence in England and Wales comes into force, as it will make the identi"cation and tracking of cases through the criminal justice system more straightforward. However, the voices of victims who do not report to the police must also continue to be heard and future research should not be limited to new criminal justice responses.Needle spiking, as with other forms of spiking, is a life-changing crime that can have profound short and long term physical and mental health impacts. Poor criminal justice and health responses can exacerbate these harms. By integrating existing research on drink spiking with new empirical research on needle spiking, set against the backdrop of media and government reactions, this article contributes towards a renewed academic, policy and practice focus on all forms of spiking. While much attention is being placed on the promised legislative reform, this article has highlighted other, non-legislative problems that that persist. The introduction of a new criminal o#ence should be the beginning – not the conclusion – of renewed e#orts to prevent spiking.AcknowledgementsSincere thanks to the "ve people that trusted us with their experiences. We are grateful to [colleagues, anonymised for peer review] for useful suggestions in the development of this paper. We are also grateful for the time and attention given to this paper by two anonymous reviewers whose feedback was extremely useful.Disclosure statementNo potential con$ict of interest was reported by the author(s).References1. Allen, F. 2021. Police Scotland investigate reports of spiking by injection. BBC Scotland News, 20 Oct. Available from: https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-scotland-58979731 [Accessed 10 March 2024]. Google Scholar2. Anderson, L., Flynn, A., and Pilgrim, J., 2017. A global epidemiological perspective on the toxicology of drug facilitated sexual assault: a systematic review. Journal of forensic and legal medicine, 47, 46–54.PubMed Web of Science ® Google Scholar3. BBC News. 2021a. Calls for nightclub searches after Nottingham needle spiking reports. BBC News, 20 Oct. Available from: https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-nottinghamshire-58977839 [Accessed 10 March 2024].Google Scholar4. BBC News. 2021b. Nottinghamshire police receive 146 needle spiking reports. BBC News, 17 Dec. Available from: https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-nottinghamshire-59699245 [Accessed 11 March 2024].Google Scholar5. Bendau, A., et al., 2023. Spiking versus speculation? Perceived prevalence, probability, and fear of drink and needle spiking. Journal of drug issues, 55 (1), 89–103. doi:10.1177/00220426231197826.Google Scholar6. Blandamer, T., et al., 2023. Drink and injection spiking: how to approach an increase in presentations? Practice review. Emergency medical journal, 40 (4), 308–312.PubMed Google Scholar7. Brown, H., and Bryan, A. 2021. Girls Night In: campaign to Boycott Clubs sees widespread support inScotland following reports of spiking across UK. The Scotsman, 21 Oct. Available from: https://www.scotsman.com/news/people/campaign-urges-people-to-boycott-pubs-following-reports-of-  spiking-across-the-uk-3427114[Accessed 11 March 2024]. Google Scholar8. Burrell, A., et al. 2023. Spiking prevalence and motivation: a review of the literature. Birmingham: University of Birmingham [Accessed 16 Apr 2024].Google Scholar9. Davies, E.L., et al., 2024. Exploring experiences of drink and needle spiking incidents among global drug survey respondents from 22 countries. Journal of drug issues, 0 (0), [online "rst]. doi:10.1177/00220426241248613.Web of Science ® Google Scholar10. Gee, D., et al., 2006. Operation MATISSE: investigating drug facilitated sexual assault. London, UK: The Association of Chief Police O!cers.Google Scholar11. Greater Manchester Police. 2020. News: a serial rapist who "lmed himself attacking his victims afterdrugging them at his home in Manchester has been jailed. Available from: https://www.gmp.police.uk/news/greater-manchester/news/news/2020/january/a-serial-rapist-who-  "lmed-himself-attacking-his-victims-after-drugging-them-at-his-home-in-manchester-has-been-jailed/[Accessed 21 Dec 2023]. Google Scholar12. Harrison, J. 2021. Spiking by injection: experts say scenario is ‘Far-fetched’. The Herald, 22 Nov. Available from: Spiking by injection: experts say scenario is ‘far-fetched’ | HeraldScotland [Accessed 5 March 2024]. Google Scholar13. Home O!ce. 2023. Understanding and tackling spiking report. Dec 2023. https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/media/663b30dd4d8bb7378fb6c340/E02885674_Statutory_Repor  t_on_Spiking_Accessible.pdf[Accessed 6 June 2024]. Google Scholar14. House of Commons Home A#airs Committee. 2022a. Spiking. Ninth Report of Session 2021–22 report, together with formal minutes relating to the report. Ordered by the House of Commons to be printed 20 April 2022. Available from: https://committees.parliament.uk/publications/21969/documents/165662/default/ [Accessed 11 March 2024].Google Scholar15. House of Commons Home A#airs Committee. 2022b. Spiking: Government response to the Committee’s Ninth Report of Session 2021–22. Second special report of session 2022–23. Ordered by the House of Commons to be printed 29 June 2022. Available from: https://committees.parliament.uk/publications/22887/documents/168013/default/ [Accessed 11 March 2024].Google Scholar16. Marks, A., 2024. Spiking: the case for a new statutory o#ence. Criminal Law review, 11, 760–777. Google Scholar17. McPherson, B. 2007. Drink spiking: an investigation of its occurrence and predictors of perpetration andvictimisation. RMIT University. Available from: https://researchrepository.rmit.edu.au/esploro/outputs/doctoral/Drink-spiking-an-investigation-of-  its/9921861580101341#"le-0[Accessed 6 June 2024]. Google Scholar18. Ng, K. 2021. Needle spiking: what is it and why is it happening? The Independent. 3 Nov. Available from: https://www.independent.co.uk/life-style/health-and-families/needle-spiking-nightclubs-women-  injections-b1942724.html[Accessed 18 March 2024]. Google Scholar19. NPCC. 2024. Police target night-time economy to tackle spiking, 24 March 2024. Available from: https://news.npcc.police.uk/releases/police-target-night-time-economy-to-tackle-spiking [Accessed 28March 2024).Google Scholar20. Police Scotland. 2021. Police Scotland statement regarding spiking by injection, Oct 2021. Available from: https://www.scotland.police.uk/what-s-happening/news/2021/october/police-scotland-statement-  regarding-spiking-by-injection/[Accessed 9 Feb 2024]. Google Scholar21. Siddique, H. 2021. Rapist John Worboys loses appeal against two life sentences. The Guardian, 24 Feb. Available from:https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2021/feb/24/john-worboys-rapist-loses-appeal-against-life- sentence[Accessed 15 Jan 2024]. Google Scholar22. Swan, S.C., et al., 2017. Just a dare or unaware? Outcomes and motives of drugging (“drink spiking”) Among students at three college campuses. Psychology of violence, 7 (2), 253–264.Web of Science ® Google Scholar23. Taylor, N., Prichard, J., and Charlton, K. 2004. National project on drink spiking: investigating the nature and extent of drink spiking in Australia. Available from:https://www.aic.gov.au/sites/default/"les/2020-05/national-project-on-drink-spiking-investigating-the-  nature-and-extent-of-drink-spiking-in-australia.pdf[Accessed 9 Dec 2023]. Google Scholar24. Waiton, S. 2021. Did all those Nightclub needle attacks actually never happen? Criminologist who'sstudied the evidence casts doubt on reports of women being injected with date-rape drugs. The Mail On Sunday, 20 Nov - updated 22 Nov. Available from:https://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-10225259/Did-nightclub-needle-attacks-actually-never-happen-Criminologist-casts-doubt.html [Accessed 9 Dec 2023].Google Scholar25. Westmarland, N. 2022. Spiking: what universities can do. London: Universities UK. Available at: https://www.universitiesuk.ac.uk/sites/default/"les/"eld/downloads/2022-08/spiking-what-universities-  can-do-practice-note.pdfGoogle Scholar26. Westmarland, N., and Bows, H., 2019. Researching gender, violence and abuse: theory, methods, action. London: Routledge.Google Scholar27. YouGov. 2021. Drink spiking: survey results. Available from: https://docs.cdn.yougov.com/cjuftnxdw5/YouGov%20-%20Drink%20Spiking.pdf [Accessed 22 Dec 2023]. Google ScholarDownload PDF
MenuHome Environment  Waste and recycling Household waste duty of care: fixed penalty notice guidanceDepartmentfor Environment, Food & Rural A?airs1. IntroductionThe fixed penalty notice (FPN) for breaches of the household waste duty of care provides an alternative to prosecution. It allows an individual to discharge liability for the duty of care o?ence by payment of a financial penalty. There is no obligation for you to o?er an alleged o?ender the option to discharge liability through an FPN. However, it can be more proportionate than prosecution through the courts.The duty of care requires occupiers of domestic property to take all reasonable measures that are available to them in the circumstances, to make sure that they only transfer household waste produced on their property to an authorised person. This reduces the chance of waste ending up in the hands of those who would fly-tip it. More detail on this duty of care is set out in  section 5 of the Waste Duty of Care Code of Practice.You should follow this guidance when giving fixed penalties for breaches of the household waste duty of care as an alternative to prosecution. You should also follow the g eneral guidance on the use of fixed penalty notices.2. When you can give fixed penaltiesYou may give the FPN when an individual appears to have failed to comply with their duty of care under section 34(2A) of the Environmental Protection Act 1990 in England. For example: where fly-tipped waste can be traced back to an individual who is found to have failed to take reasonable steps to ensure that they transferred the waste to an authorised person where an unauthorised carrier is found to be carrying household waste that was directly transferred to them by the occupier of a domestic property where an individual is found to have transferred their household waste to an unauthorised person at a site that does not have a permit or exemptionAn authorised person may still fly-tip waste so tracing fly-tipped waste to a household does not necessarily demonstrate a breach of the duty of care. An individual should be given an opportunity to demonstrate that they took reasonable steps to determine the person that took their waste was authorised to do so. If fly-tipped waste is traced to an individual and they are unable to identify who took their waste, or the carrier they identify is unauthorised, then it is reasonable to believe their duty of care was not met.3. When you should not or cannot issue fixed penaltiesEnforcement should focus on those who, as a result of not meeting their duty of care, enable their waste to be fly-tipped or otherwise inappropriately disposed of. Individuals should not be penalised for minor breaches which do not lead to waste being inappropriately disposed of. This includes where an individual uses an authorised carrier that disposes of their waste appropriately but doesn’t check that they are authorised.3.1 Proportionate useThe government wishes to encourage a balanced approach to enforcement. The principles of the Regulators Code apply to the enforcement of the household waste duty of care. An e?ective environmental o?ences enforcement regime is one that is proportionate, consistent, targeted, transparent and accountable. Under the Legislative and Regulatory Reform Act 2006, you have a duty to carry out regulatory activities in a way which is transparent, accountable, proportionate and consistent, and for them to be targeted only at cases in which action is needed. In no circumstances should enforcement be used as a means to generate income.If an individual is considered to be a vulnerable person (for example due to age related ill-health or a mental or physical disability or divergence), you should give close consideration as to whether it is proportionate and in the public interest to proceed with enforcement, on a case-by-case basis.An individual giving their waste to a friend or family member to dispose of would breach the duty of care. However, it would only be appropriate and in the public interest to enforce in this and similar circumstances where there is evidence the friend or family member has disposed of the waste inappropriately. For example enforcement would not be appropriate if a neighbour takes their waste to the local household waste recycling centre.To help reduce the potential for breaches of the Duty of Care, Local Authorities should have regard to the WRAP Household Waste Recycling Centre (HWRC) Guide in relation to promoting responsible behaviour by local residents through not charging residents for waste from small scale DIY activities.3.2 Local authority waste collectionsThis FPN is not applicable where an individual intends for waste to be collected by the local authority collection service, for instance where this is put out in household waste or recycling bins. It is reasonable to believe the local authority or any contracted provider working on their behalf is an authorised person and so in putting the waste out for collection by a local authority, the individual has taken all reasonable steps to ensure the person they transfer it to is authorised. Other penalties are already available for individuals not complying with waste receptacle requirements and this FPN does not provide a substitute or supplementary penalty for it.3.3 TradespersonsAs per section 5.2 of the Waste Duty of Care Code of Practice, where a tradesperson is working on a property, they are responsible for the waste they produce. As the occupier is not producing the waste, they are not transferring it to the tradesperson and so the duty of care does not apply.3.4 Household waste cleared by landlordsWhere a landlord is arranging the clearance of premises after a tenancy has ended, the resulting waste is not considered to be household waste, nor are they the occupier. This means the duty of care under Section 34(1) of the Environmental Protection Act applies instead and this FPN cannot be used.3.5 Investigating the fly-tipperYou should give consideration to whether the evidence provided by an individual investigated for breach of the household waste duty of care enables investigation or prosecution of the fly-tipper, and whether enforcement against that individual would have a positive or negative impact on that investigation or prosecution.3.6 Opting for prosecutionFPNs should not be given where prosecution through the courts is more appropriate, for example the deliberate transfer of waste to an unauthorised person in the knowledge that it would be fly-tipped, or when someone is a persistent o?ender with a record of not paying fixed penalties for environmental o?ences.4. How to issue fixed penaltiesThe fixed penalty notice can be given as an o?er for an individual to discharge any liability to conviction for failing to meet their household waste duty of care. Instead of proceeding to prosecute, you may first o?er the opportunity to pay the fixed penalty.4.1 Opportunity to demonstrate duty of careAn individual’s household waste can still end up fly-tipped or in the possession of an unauthorised carrier, even if they meet their duty of care. As such before you decide to enforce, either directly through prosecution or by first giving a fixed penalty notice, the case should be investigated. This should include giving the individual an opportunity to demonstrate whether or not they met their duty of care. This could include, but is not limited to: details of the business and of any vehicle used which can be linked to an authorised operator a record of the checks made including the operators registration, permit or exemption number a receipt for the transaction which includes the business details of a registered operator a copy or photograph of the carrier’s waste license or site’s permitHowever, it should be emphasised that there is no duty on an individual to keep a waste transfer note or any other written records when transferring their household waste. The absence of written records does not prevent an individual from making the case that they met their duty of care.When giving the individual the opportunity to demonstrate they met their duty of care, you should inform them: of the evidence gathered, e.g. if their waste has been found fly-tipped  that they may face prosecution, and why whether a fixed penalty notice would be given to discharge liability for the o?enceIf an individual makes a convincing case that they complied with their duty of care you cannot give an FPN (or prosecute).4.2 Issuing the fixed penalty noticeWhen issuing an FPN, the notice must name the individual and tell them: why they have been given a fixed penalty, i.e. the circumstances alleged to constitute the o?ence that the FPN o?ers an option to discharge liability for a criminal o?ence without prosecution, but they may choose not to pay it how long they have to pay to discharge liability (14 days beginning with the date of the notice) that proceedings will not be taken for the o?ence during the payment period that they can make representations to the local authority to challenge the allegations contained in the fixed penalty notice (and how to do so) the level of the penalty and how they can pay it, including to whom it should be paid and the address to do so if there’s a discount for paying early (10 days beginning with the date of the notice) Penalties should be set within the limits set out in legislation:
Default penalty
Minimum full penalty
Maximum full penalty
Minimum discounted penalty
£200	£150	£600	£1204.3 Where waste comes from multiple individuals in the householdThe duty of care applies to the individual occupier of the property who is arranging the transfer of household waste produced in that property. You will need to consider who in the household is responsible for the breach of the duty of care before issuing the FPN against them.4.4 Cross-boundary approachGiven the potential for fly-tipping to cross local authority borders, it is recommended that you consider the benefits of consistent, and possibly collaborative, approaches to enforcement with neighbouring authorities. In particular FPN regimes in two-tier areas should be aligned to promote consistent application.The FPN can be used when an individual appears to have failed to comply with their duty of care in England only. This relates to the point where the transfer of waste took place, not the final disposal point of the waste. This would typically be if they take their waste to an unauthorised site in England, or if they transfer their waste to an unauthorised carrier in England, even if the waste is ultimately taken out of England.For cases that cross authority boundaries within England, any enforcement authority in England can issue an FPN where it appears to them that a person has failed to comply with the duty of care. This will typically be as a result of investigating fly-tipped waste in their area and tracing it back to an individual, even if that individual originally transferred the waste outside that area.Once an FPN has been issued, no authority may begin proceedings until after the 14 day payment period for that FPN has ended. Additionally, an FPN cannot be given to someone if one has already been given to them by the same or another authority.To avoid the duplication of FPNs, if you issue an FPN for a breach of the duty of care that took place in the area of another authority, you must give that other authority a copy of the FPN at the time of issuing. This includes providing the Environment Agency with a copy of each FPN regardless of area via the e-mail address household.wastefpns@environment-agency .gov.uk.5. Non-payment of fixed penaltiesAs the FPN o?ers an option to discharge liability for the o?ence, an alleged o?ender may choose not to accept or pay a fixed penalty. They may also provide evidence at any time that they did not commit the o?ence.Where an individual does not pay an FPN you are expected to take the case to prosecution unless they have given a convincing reason for you not to do so. As such, detailed evidence gathering should be carried out at the start of the investigation before an FPN is given to ensure prosecution can take place if needed. Failure to follow up an unpaid FPN with prosecution for the original o?ence will discredit the use of fixed penalties and the duty of care itself.The need to pursue unpaid fixed penalty notices must be considered in the development of an enforcement strategy and the necessary resources made available. It is not acceptable for an authority to decide after a fixed penalty notice has been issued that it does not have the resources to prosecute if the notice is unpaid.5.1 Challenge processThere is no right of appeal against an FPN as they simply o?er an optional means of discharging liability for an o?ence. However, liability for that alleged o?ence can be disputed or the appropriateness of enforcement challenged. In issuing the FPN you must make clear to the recipient that they are entitled to make such representations. If after the FPN is issued you receive a convincing case that a person should not be prosecuted, the FPN should be withdrawn and the recipient promptly informed that you do not intend to prosecute.The grounds of such a case might include, but are not limited to if: the person issued with the penalty was not the person that committed the o?ence, for instance where someone else arranged for the disposal of the waste the person issued with the FPN brings forward evidence that could undermine any later prosecution evidence is provided that the person issued with an FPN is in some way vulnerable and enforcement would not be in the public interest evidence is provided that enforcement would, for any other reason, not be considered to be in the public interestYou must consider any information provided when deciding whether or not to start criminal proceedings against the person if the FPN goes unpaid.6. Awareness raisingYou should not view your enforcement regime in isolation. As well as taking enforcement action for breaches of the household waste duty of care, you should also aim to reduce breaches through clear, well-designed communications that inform the public of their duty of care and the consequences of breaching it.Raising awareness of successful enforcement action can also help deter others from committing o?ences. You should communicate to the community your reasons for using the FPN and make it clear that enforcement is about preventing waste crime and protecting the environment.A Defra funded research project testing behavioural insights was used to develop communication materials for the household Waste Duty of Care. These communication materials provide a framework to support activities that raise awareness.7. Using money from FPNsYou may use money from FPNs only for the following purposes, as set out in section 73ZA of the Environmental Protection Act 1990: enforcement against fly-tipping and breaches of household waste duty of care  collection and disposal of fly-tipped waste the restoration of land a?ected by fly-tipping8. ReportingYou should report regularly and consistently on your use of the FPN to help the public understand the approach to enforcement.WasteDataFlow includes a category for reporting the number of Duty of Care FPNs issued, starting from the January 2019 reporting round.Services and informationGovernment activityBenefitsEducation and learningDepartmentsBirths, death, marriages and careEmploying peopleNewsBusiness and self-employedEnvironment and countrysideGuidance and regulationChildcare and parentingHousing and local servicesResearch and statisticsCitizenship and living in the UKMoney and taxPolicy papers and consultationsCrime, justice and the lawPassports, travel and living abroadTransparencyDisabled peopleVisas and immigrationHow government worksDriving and transportWorking , jobs and pensionsGet involved
24/03/2025 Guidance for ethical and professional behaviour in policing https://www.college.police.uk/ethics/code-of-ethics/guidance PageGuidance for ethical and professional behaviour in policingCode of Ethics guidance to help put the ethical policing principles into day-to-day practice. First published24 January 2024Effective policing is built on public trust and confidence. This depends on a policing profession that is ethical and professional in the way that it respects, listens, responds, improves and serves the public.The College of Policing has developed a statutory Code of Practice to complement a non-statutory Code of Ethics. Together, they will support everyone in policing to provide ethical and professional policing services. The Code of Ethics includes ethical policing principles to support decision making, as well as guidance on ethical and professional behaviour.By ‘everyone in policing’, we mean:  police officers police staff police community support officers (PCSOs)  those with designated powers members of the Special Constabulary  police support volunteers and cadets police officers and staff on secondment or overseas deployment designated contract managers, contractors and staff employed by suppliers providing services on behalf of forcesFor ease, the term ‘staff’ is used throughout this guidance to refer to the roles outlined.PurposePolicing professionals are more likely to be judged as behaving ethically when their decisions and actions are lawful and consistent with the ethical policing principles.
The policing profession is committed to the highest standards of behaviour. This guidance provides guidance on ethical and professional behaviour for everyone in policing. This is what the public has a right to expect from us, and what we should expect from ourselves and each other. It contains advice on areas of policing that are important to maintaining public trust and legitimacy, as well as additional guidance where experience tells us we could benefit from it, in order to help us do the right thing. It also signposts guidance that is contained elsewhere but not always easily located.The guidance does not – and cannot – cover every situation that someone working in policing might face, either in the course of their work or when not working. Nor does the guidance replace the need for common sense and professional judgement in how those working across a wide range of policing roles and responsibilities behave. However, the guidance will assist with building a positive workplace culture by spelling out what good policing looks like, and by promoting professional conduct and decision making.For the avoidance of doubt, the Code of Ethics does not set the standards against which conduct should be assessed. Those standards are set by the Police Conduct Regulations and terms of employment.Other guidance helps to ensure that assessments against the standards are consistent, including:  the statutory Home Office guidance College of Policing guidance on outcomes in police misconduct proceedings 2022 Guidance Note 9 to the Police Staff Council England and Wales Handbook for staff employed under its provisionsThis guidance is not statutory and does not alter statutory provisions or replace terms of employment or appointment.As professionals in policing, we will strive to follow this guidance.Being a member of the policing professionWe recognise that, as a result of being part of the policing profession, higher expectations are placed on us compared to the general public. As policing professionals, more attention is likely to be drawn to any misuse of our position or any failure to meet the expectations of our profession.We uphold and promote the reputation of the police service by acting lawfully and in a way that demonstrates fairness and respect, policing with integrity, trust, confidence and legitimacy (in line with the College of Policing leadership standards).The public interest and trustOur high expectations demand that we: think about how our actions might be interpreted or perceived by others when taking decisions  act selflessly and in the public interest act in the knowledge that every interaction with the public may influence their own – and other people’s – trust and confidence in policing act in a truthful, trustworthy and sincere manner
 do not knowingly make false, misleading or inaccurate oral or written statements, unless it is reasonable and proportionate to do so while pursuing a legitimate and lawful aim do not use our position to gain any personal advantage only use our police identification or warrant cards for policing purposes and avoid seeking a personal advantage or abusing our position (this does not apply to schemes designed to benefit the public sector or policing profession in general) neither solicit nor accept the offer of any gift, gratuity or hospitality that could compromise our impartiality (in accordance with force policies on gifts and gratuities) operate within our legal authority, in accordance with accepted good practice, and consistently with the ethical policing principles and this guidance do nothing, whether related to work or not, that damages the relationship of trust and confidence with the public ensure that our actions are consistent with what we say we will do ensure that our behaviour and language are not discriminatory, abusive, oppressive, harassing, bullying or victimising to the general public, our partners in providing services to the public or our policing colleagues – this includes when communicating digitally (including email, SMS and other digital platforms) and when using social media, both inside and outside of work recognise when we may not have the expertise or knowledge needed and when issues should be referred, or advice should be sought, from line managers or those with specialist expertiseDoing our bestAs policing professionals, we are expected to carry out our responsibilities in an honest and professional manner. This means demonstrating care, attention and diligence, as well as fulfilling our role to the best of our abilities at all times. We: always act diligently and efficiently by being conscientious and thorough in our work and in exercising our responsibilities promote a positive professional image of the police service at all times are conscious of the impact that our behaviour and decisions have on others  take ownership for resolving problems demonstrate courage and resilience in dealing with difficult and potentially volatile situations  act on our own initiative to address issues show a strong work ethic and demonstrate extra effort when required remain calm and professional under pressure, defusing conflict and being prepared to step forward and take control when required abide by all instructions, policies and procedures set by the police service, where we are reasonably expected to know these, unless we have – and are able to provide – a clear rationale for not doing so do not let fear of being criticised divert us from our professional duties  prioritise the demands on our time and resources where necessary are punctual and maintain a professional appearance understand that we can seek advice and support from staff associations and trade unionsBeing open, honest and candid
We demonstrate candour through our ‘duty to cooperate’. This is a responsibility to give appropriate and timely cooperation during investigations, inquiries and formal proceedings, participating openly and professionally when identified as a witness. This recognises that policing professionals and organisations are accountable and willing to learn from experience.Our high expectations demand that we: are open and truthful in our dealings with the public and our colleagues are open and transparent in accounting for our decisions, providing an honest and truthful representation whenever answerable for our actions in policing always conduct ourselves with candour, participating openly and professionally when dealing with matters relating to policing, unless we are: acting under a statutory legal authority or to meet a legitimate operational policing aim (see examples of statutory authority) subject to operational security requirements with colleagues, line management, partners and oversight bodies in the execution of legitimate duties recognise that for compassionate reasons, it may sometimes be necessary for policing professionals to withhold information – this action is appropriate where it is deemed, in a person’s professional judgement, to be necessary are proactive with our openness and honesty with the public when a policing service to which they are entitled goes wrong and as a result they are adversely affected, by: explaining the short- and long-term effects of what has happened offering an apology without undue delay, expressing regret and appropriate remedy to put the matter right explaining to those affected their entitlement to the police complaints system raise issues with line management, ensuring reflection to enable individual and organisational learning when something goes wrong and an immediate remedy is not possible and/or a reoccurrence is likely cooperate appropriately with investigations, inquiries and formal proceedings when asked to do so as a witness, being open and professional in the way we participate always support and encourage colleagues to be both open and candid, and to raise concerns appropriately  manage all official documents and records in accordance with the Code of Practice on police informationand records managementExamples of statutory legal authorityIn policing, there will be occasions when demonstrating candour, through the requirement to cooperate, will be limited by statutory legal authorities subject to existing laws relating to privacy, data protection and national security. This includes the following. Preventing the disclosure of relevant material in compliance with the Criminal Procedure and Investigations Act 1996. Subterfuge in approved firearms tactics or within a live crime-inaction kidnap and extortion investigation, where it is necessary to protect life and prevent suffering in meeting an obligation under Article 2 of the European Convention on Human Rights (PDF).Covert policing
 The police service operates on the basis of openness and transparency. This is essential to maintaining and enhancing a positive relationship between the policing profession and the community. To achieve legitimate policing aims, it is sometimes necessary to use covert tactics. This is recognised in law. Covert tactics must be appropriately authorised. Any deployments must be shown to be proportionate, lawful, accountable and necessary. Covert operatives who authorise or perform covert policing roles must keep in mind this guidance, as well as the ethical policing principles and authorised professional practice (APP), at all times. Covert operatives can be authorised to create a false legend and persona within an authorised covert policing operation. Covert operatives will comply with the Undercover policing APP, which makes it clear that it is never acceptable for an undercover operative to have an intimate sexual relationship with those they are deployed to infiltrate and target or encounter during their deployment. Legitimate adoption of a ‘neither confirm nor deny’ response to protect covert policing tactics.Business interest and associationsOur high expectations demand that we: are actively aware of, and identify when, associations with – or advocacy for – any groups or individuals create a conflict of interest or risk to our police work and responsibilities, consequently affecting our ability to discharge our policing duties effectively and impartially take steps to mitigate any conflict of interest and notify associations where required in line with policy  ensure that any business interest we have is reported, is authorised and does not conflict with our policework and responsibilities seek clarification on what a conflict of interest is if we are unsure report changes in our personal circumstances that could have an impact on our vetting status (including notifiable associations)Additional professional requirements for police officers onlyThe actions or associations of police officers can bring discredit and disrepute to the police service and could constitute misconduct. As police officers, we: recognise that we must abide by paragraph 1 of Schedule 1 of The Police Regulations 2003, which limits our involvement in politics know that being subject to any of the following measures could bring discredit on our police service, may affect our vetting status and may result in action being taken for misconduct, depending on the circumstances of the particular matter: arrest any legal processing in connection with an allegation of criminal conduct  a summons for an offence a penalty notice for disorder an endorsable fixed penalty notice for a road traffic offence a charge or caution for an offence by any law enforcement agency a conviction, sentence or condition imposed by any court, whether criminal or civil (excluding matrimonial proceedings, but including non-molestation orders or occupation orders) – ‘conditions imposed by any court’ would include, for example, orders to deal with anti-social behaviour, a restraining order or a bind-over any legal proceedings taken against us for debt recovery, or any other adverse financial judgments
 any known criminal conviction against a member of our immediate family or a close friend, so that appropriate safeguards can be put in placeWe will report, as soon as reasonably practical, any occasion – whether in the UK or elsewhere – when we are subject to any of the measures listed above. When we are in doubt as to whether to make such a report, we understand that it is best to seek advice.Additional professional requirements for police staff, volunteers and others working in policing (not police officers)As police professionals, we know that being subject to any of the measures listed above could bring discredit on our police service, may affect our vetting status and may result in disciplinary action being taken, depending on the circumstances of the particular matter. For these reasons: we will report any caution or conviction against us for a criminal offence we must report all convictions, sentences and conditions imposed on us by any court, whether criminal or civil, as soon as reasonably practical we may be required to disclose other legal matters affecting us for legitimate policing purposes, such as vetting, depending on the nature of our particular roleWhen we are in doubt as to whether to make such a report, we understand that it is best to seek advice.ConfidentialityWe understand the importance of managing information that comes into our possession through our police work. We understand that we have the responsibility to share some information when it is needed and to protect other information from misuse. As a result, we will protect: police information from being accessed or accessible to unauthorised recipients, either on-duty or off-duty  police information in line with the General Data Protection Regulations (GDPR) and the Code of Practiceon police information and records management personal data, with the understanding that by accessing such data without authorisation, we could be committing a criminal offence, regardless of whether we then disclose that personal data police information and not ‘gossip’ to colleagues who do not need to know it for a policing or welfare purpose, or to anyone – including friends and family – who could contribute to the misuse of police information police information that might prejudice investigations, operations or policing tactics our own personal and professional information because we recognise that it might increase our vulnerability to harassment, corruption and blackmail (see APP on undercover policing) the quality of the data that we enter on to police systemsFairness and respectAs policing professionals, we are expected to understand our role in acknowledging and responding to our diverse society, and to treat all people and their property with fairness, dignity and respect, in accordance with their needs. We:
 embrace diversity with acceptance and understanding, and actively challenge any discriminatory behaviour recognise when systems, policies or processes appear to be failing communities or leading to unfair outcomes, for members of the public or for colleagues, and bring this to the attention of our leaders or line managers are courteous, polite and considerate, demonstrating empathy and compassion, while acknowledging that we are all different in the extent to which we are able to recognise emotions in others recognise that our contact may be the first and only time a person interacts with the police, and that we are ambassadors for our profession deal with people as individuals with sensitivity, respect and dignity recognise that the needs and perspectives of different individuals or groups may be very different to our own, and try to understand these differences and respond appropriately treat people fairly and without prejudice, regardless of their background or circumstances treat all victims of crime and disorder with care and empathy, and in compliance with the Victims’ Code of Practice establish, take account of and respond to the particular needs of witnesses, providing all possible protection and support recognise that some people and groups we come into contact with may be vulnerable in particular ways – in other words, unable to take care of or protect themselves or others from harm or exploitation, as a result of their situation or circumstances – and therefore may require additional support and help recognise that some vulnerable people will seek a supportive relationship that extends beyond professional boundaries and that we must report this to our line managers act to protect vulnerable people and groups from behaviour that is abusive, harassing, bullying, intimidating, exploitative or victimising avoid any behaviour that could cause unreasonable distress or harm, including any behaviour that might interfere with our colleagues’ ability to carry out their duties use appropriate language and behaviour in our dealings with the public and our colleagues consider our personal views, values or beliefs, so that they do not affect our professional relationships or the service we provide play an active role in recognising and eliminating unlawful discrimination, and in promoting equality of opportunity and good relations between all people are aware of – and challenge – the influence that biases (such as stereotypes, 'group think' or partiality) can have on our actions and decisions, and ensure that we act with impartialityRespecting the publicAs policing professionals, we show a real belief in, and commitment to, service to the public, focusing on what matters to the public and will best serve their interests (for example, through the Police Race Action Plan). We: accept and value our duty to engage the public in a manner that is respectful and fair in developing policing priorities, policies and decisions, and in putting them into effect understand the expectations, changing needs and concerns of different communities, and do what is necessary and proportionate to address them build public confidence by talking and listening with people in local communities to explore their viewpoints and break down barriers between these communities and the police understand the impact and benefits of policing for different communities, and identify the best way to provide services to them take a proactive approach to opposing discrimination to help adequately support victims, encourage reporting and prevent future incidents
RelationshipsWhile the vast majority of professional relationships are entirely appropriate, we recognise the need to ensure that any professional relationship we have with the public or colleagues maintains acceptable boundaries (see guidance on appropriate personal relationships and behaviours in the workplace (PDF) and maintaining a professional boundary between police and members of the public (PDF)).We recognise the need to manage our relationships with the public because of the existence of a power imbalance. This occurs because policing professionals may: have considerable discretion over the lawful use of policing powers  have access to sensitive knowledge about people be working with individuals where the possibility of statutory intervention is present (for example, the compulsory admission of someone who is mentally ill) be making significant decisions regarding people’s access to policing servicesWe also understand that individuals may not be – or may feel they are not – free to choose whether they engage with us, they may feel under compulsion to do so, or they may be in a vulnerable state (for example, distressed or confused). We acknowledge that this power imbalance should not be regarded negatively, but as a fundamental factor in such relationships. We: respect personal and professional boundaries, so as to maintain the integrity and rights of those we come into contact with do not use our professional position to pursue a sexual or improper emotional relationship with a member of the public do not engage in sexual conduct or other inappropriate behaviour when on duty recognise that a person’s vulnerability and experience of trauma may have an impact on whether any relationship could ever be proper in the circumstances only contact victims, witnesses or other members of the public regarding a policing matter using work devices – personal devices should only be used in exceptional circumstances discuss with a line manager or other police professional any doubts about whether a relationship, or a given action within it, is unacceptable or inappropriateHuman rightsAs policing professionals, we are expected to respect and protect human dignity and uphold human rights. We: recognise our duty to respect and protect human rights, and understand that by acting on this duty, we help build a safe and strong society know and understand the legal framework relating to human rights where it is appropriate to our role  respect all people and their individual beliefs, values, cultures and needs equally and impartially make decisions about human rights according to the principles of proportionality, legality, accountability, necessity, non-discrimination and humanityCooperationAs policing professionals, we are expected to work cooperatively to get things done, to help and support others, and to be committed to developing positive working relationships. We:
 work in partnership with other agencies to provide the best possible overall service to the public  work cooperatively, willingly giving help and support to colleagues, people and our communities  are approachable and committed to developing positive working relationships explain things as well as we can, focusing on the key points and talking to people using language they understand listen carefully and ask questions to clarify understanding, expressing our own views positively and constructivelyWellness and wellbeingAs policing professionals, we are expected to take all necessary steps to ensure that we are physically, mentally and emotionally fit to carry out our policing roles and responsibilities, and to do what we can to support our colleagues to do the same. We: consider our own mental health and wellbeing and that of our colleagues, to the best of our ability support an open and safe environment in which people have confidence to talk to peers or managers to seek advice or signposting to support for welfare issues ensure that when we believe we are unfit to undertake our role or are impaired for duty, we declare this to the appropriate person as soon as practicable report financial difficulties in line with policy and access welfare support to mitigate this are prepared to do what we can to address personal matters when they have an impact on our ability to discharge our professional responsibilities, seeking appropriate support when this is needed are aware of the support for ourselves and our peers that is available in our force and from Oscar Kilo do not make ourselves unfit or impaired for work as a result of the misuse of substances – this includes the use of ‘legal highs’ when absent from work on account of sickness, do not engage in activities that could impair our return to workLine manager considerationsAs supervisors, managers and leaders of the policing profession, we: will emphasise the importance of staff looking after and maintaining their wellbeing personally and professionally will encourage an open and safe environment in which people have confidence to talk to peers or managers to seek advice or signposting to support for welfare and wellbeing issues understand that personal medical and financial information is sensitive and treat it confidentially, only sharing if necessary may refer individuals to occupational health where there are concerns about an individual’s health and the impact it may have on their ability to perform their role recognise that some people may be reticent to share personal information for understandable reasons  support staff who disclose information about their welfare or wellbeing, and while they are trying toresolve matters ensure that support is provided to those under investigation for misconduct and for staff who have reported misconductSocial media and instant messaging
We recognise that there are benefits and dangers associated with using any platform of web-based or mobile communications, social networking sites and all other types of social media.Recognising the potential risks of using social media, we will ensure that: we think about how others may perceive our social media activities, whether at work or at home we use social media responsibly, safely, positively and appropriately, knowing the value it can create for community engagement we do not post any discriminatory, abusive, oppressive, harassing, bullying, victimising or offensive material, or post material that is otherwise incompatible with the ethical policing principles, whether on- duty or off-duty we do not post any material that could undermine the reputation of policing or might run the risk of damaging public trust and confidence in our profession our membership of any social media group does not undermine the reputation of the profession  we recognise that information posted online or in private chats can be shared publicly we do not disclose information that places ourselves, colleagues or operational tactics at riskWe recognise that using social media, even when it is out of work and in our private lives, may still breach regulations or the terms of our employment if it discredits the police service as a whole or undermines public confidence in it.Decision makingAs policing professionals, we are expected to comply with legislation and to take the ethical policing principles and human rights into account when making decisions relating to our roles and responsibilities. We will use the national decision model (NDM), supported by the ethical policing principles, as frameworks to assist us in making decisions.We accept that making well-thought-out decisions can be challenging in any circumstances but can be even more difficult in the policing environment, where there is often an element of uncertainty (see the APP on Risk). This may be because: some of the necessary information may be missing, time may be limited or the situation may be high-risk  there may be a lack of control over some of the factors present in the situation there is no guarantee that our decisions will produce the outcome hoped forThe inherent uncertainty surrounding decisions is often affected by things such as ambiguity, multiple views of a particular problem, numerous possible intervention points, limited time and resources, and multiple possible solutions.Despite these challenges, most of the decisions that we make, and most of the actions we take, are successful. Similarly, it shouldn’t necessarily be assumed that harm resulting from a decision was due to poor decision making. Adverse outcomes can result from decisions made in the right ways and with the best of intentions.We understand that making decisions in uncertain conditions is a core professional requirement of many policing professionals. We cannot perform our mandate to serve and protect the public and bring offenders to justice if we are afraid to make decisions. The fact that there will always be the risk of being criticised and blamed in court or inquiries must not stop us from making a decision in the first place. We:
 ensure that we consider the ethical policing principles when making decisions gather, verify and assess all appropriate and available information at the time to gain an accurate understanding of situations consider what we are trying to achieve and a range of possible options, evaluating evidence and seeking advice where appropriate make clear, timely and justifiable decisions, reviewing these as necessary identify and assess the likely risks, costs and benefits of different options, and think about the wider consequences of decisions exercise discretion and apply professional judgement, ensuring that actions and decisions are in the public interest and proportionate, lawful and necessary keep in mind whether our decisions are likely to reflect well on the policing profession  recognise that policing action or inaction may have an impact on public confidence act and take decisions objectively, using the best available evidence and without prejudice  explain the rationale for our decisions to those affected by them review and reflect on our decisions, in line with the NDM, ensuring that we identify learning opportunitiesUse of discretionPolice discretion is necessary but must be used wisely. When using our discretion, we:  use our training, skills and knowledge about policing are aware of the influence that biases (such as stereotypes or ‘group think’) can have on our actions and decisions consider what we are trying to achieve and the potential effects of our decisions  ensure that we have a rationale for, and are able to explain, our use of discretionUse of policing powersAs policing professionals, we are expected to use our policing powers only as part of our role and responsibilities and to the extent that is proportionate, lawful, necessary and reasonable in all the circumstances at the time. The ethical policing principles can help us to make such decisions. We will use our powers legitimately and safely, using communication to de-escalate a given situation as a primary tactic where possible. We: recognise that we may be held accountable for the use of our powers through internal review or external scrutiny have to consider the impact of our use of powers on trust and confidence among different communities  maintain our professional knowledge and any accreditation so that we comply with our legalresponsibilities to the best of our ability (see the section of the Code of Practice for Ethical Policing on continuing professional development) are prepared to explain the reasons for our actions as fully as possible, as they may not always be understood by others, including the public consider whether a particular decision, action or omission might result in members of the public losing trust and confidence in the policing profession recognise some vulnerabilities may require different communication and de-escalation approachesRecognising the opportunity to learn
We understand that the public interest is best served when we continually improve our service and performance. Self-awareness, self-challenge and reflection can be used to achieve this. As a policing profession, we understand that: there is an opportunity to learn from our actions, whether they are successful or not we learn best when we are accountable, open and transparent about our actions and decisions, and when we demonstrate candour, even when this makes us feel uncomfortable it is our responsibility to improve our own performance and to do what we can to help our peers and organisations do the same giving each other constructive feedback on how we are doing at work is one of the most powerful ways of helping ourselves and each other to improve by being open, frank and transparent, we will maintain the trust and confidence of the public and colleagues alike a reflective and candid approach will enable us as individuals and the organisation to continuously improve our service to the public, sharing our knowledge and learning to benefit the development of others where it becomes apparent that there is a shortcoming in our knowledge, we will bring this to the attention of our line managerLine manager considerationsAs line managers, we understand the need for us to create a culture across teams and the organisation as a whole that supports and encourages candour, and to create an environment where people are able to learn. We: ensure that our own decisions are consistent with the ethical policing principles, with a clear alignment between what we say and what we do acknowledge the achievements of individuals and teams by recognising and rewarding good work  give honest and constructive feedback to help people understand their strengths and weaknesses coach and guide team members, identifying and addressing areas for development  support lawful and reasonable decisions made by our staff take steps to encourage and recognise good performance role model best practice on inclusion in the workforce, recognising our own and our colleagues’ biases, as well as how to challenge them are aware of, and reflect on, personal biases and how they practically affect our role recognise when people are becoming demotivated and provide encouragement and supportChallenging unprofessional behaviourAs policing professionals, we have a positive obligation for challenging or reporting behaviour that is unprofessional. We: act as role models for professional behaviour actively challenge all forms of discriminatory behaviour affecting individuals with protected characteristics (see section 4 of the Equality Act 2010) have responsibility to question the conduct of colleagues, at any level (irrespective of the person’s rank, grade or role), that we believe falls below the expected standards and, if necessary, we challenge, report or
take action against such conduct report our concerns to a line manager, a force’s reporting mechanism or another appropriate channel if we feel that: we cannot question or challenge a colleague directly a proportionate response to the unprofessional behaviour requires escalating to the attention of a supervisor or manager know that there is the option to report concerns through force confidential reporting lines, and that ‘whistleblowers’ will be provided legal protections set out in the Employment Rights Act 1996 understand that if we fail to take action when we see or hear of unprofessional behaviour, we would be failing in our duty and may be complicit help to create an inclusive and supportive environment where we feel able to challenge poor behaviour  listen to, and support, anyone who reports any concern about the behaviour of someone working inpolicing that they believe has fallen below expectations do not tolerate discrimination, victimisation or any disadvantageous treatment against anyone who makes a report of unprofessional behaviour or wrongdoing understand that the service will not tolerate reports that are found to be malicious or otherwise made in bad faith, and that such reports may lead to disciplinary proceduresLine manager considerationsIf we are a supervisor or manager, we will: act as role models of professional behaviour support our staff to carry out their professional duties correctly challenge and address any unprofessional behaviour and report it in line with force policies assess, take positive action or otherwise appropriately escalate any report of unprofessional behaviour or wrongdoing made by someone for whom we are responsible take an active and proportionate approach to addressing and reporting unprofessional behaviour  encourage and support staff to challenge or report behaviour or service provision that falls belowexpectationsWhen behaviour does not meet expectationsThe police service operates on the basis of openness and transparency and is reliant on the trust and confidence of the public.There may be occasions when behaviour does not meet our high expectations, which has the potential to damage our relationship with the public and our colleagues.We know that taking action to address unprofessional behaviour is an essential part of maintaining and enhancing a positive relationship between the policing profession and the community.We understand that: the action taken must be timely and proportionate to the severity and impact of the actual, suspected or alleged unprofessional behaviour early intervention will often provide the best opportunity for success
 different procedures exist according to the type of alleged behaviour or misconduct and each case must be considered individually allegations of misconduct will be dealt with in accordance with the terms of our appointment or employment (see also the Home Office guidance, Conduct, efficiency and effectiveness: Statutory guidance on professional standards, performance and integrity in policing and Guidance Note 9 to the Police Staff Council England and Wales Handbook) relatively minor failures in professionalism may be simply and effectively dealt with through challenging our peers or team, normal day-to-day line management and learning through reflecting on what has happened the most significant failures, when assessed against our terms of appointment or employment, may require formal disciplinary action by our force or organisation (see the Employment Rights Act 1996 and the Home Office guidance, Conduct, efficiency and effectiveness: Statutory guidance on professional standards, performance and integrity in policing) disciplinary procedures (formal and informal) should be applied in a non-discriminatory manner, with due regard being paid to the need to handle allegations fairly, consistently, sensitively, confidentially and in a timely mannerLine manager considerationsAs supervisors, managers and leaders of the policing profession, we are expected to hold staff responsible and accountable for their actions and to reduce opportunities for unprofessional behaviour. We do this through role modelling, clear direction and expectations, appropriate supervision and dealing with issues as they arise and before they escalate. The use of feedback, reflective practice or formal performance and disciplinary processes (as appropriate) may be used to address any unprofessional behaviour.We recognise that conduct such as neglect of duties or laziness may be due to a lack of professionalism and commitment to ethical behaviour. It can stem from the failure to hold individuals to account, arising, for example, when there is undue tolerance and a failure to confront. This is unfair and demotivating to all other staff and can, in turn, lead to the erosion of trust and respect, and to a lowering of other individuals’ performance.We know that the use of learning through reflection by our staff can help them to develop and that a ‘blame culture’ may inhibit the openness needed.We recognise that more serious failures may require action by a line manager, whom we expect to exercise professional judgement and take into account the principle of proportionality in determining how to deal effectively with alleged unprofessional behaviour (see the College of Policing leadership standards). We will seek advice from professional standards for matters that appear especially serious.As line managers, we will act positively and unwaveringly when shortcomings, wrongdoing or concerns are raised, taking positive action that is commensurate with the seriousness of the unprofessional behaviour. We will:judge actions and decisions by the quality of the decision making, not solely by the outcomeconsider whether decisions were consistent with those of policing professionals of similar rank, role or experience taken in the same circumstanceshelp staff identify and critically reflect on honest mistakes or errors of judgementidentify and challenge unprofessional behaviour (for example, neglect of duties, slackness, dishonesty, lack of commitment) and take appropriate action
 use the relevant policies, procedures or regulations (as appropriate) to address behaviour when it is inconsistent with the Code of Ethics ensure that support is provided to those under investigation for misconduct and for staff who have reported misconductTagsCode of Ethics
Books
Try the new Google BooksCheck out the new look and enjoy easier access to your favorite featuresNo thanksResult 1 of 8 in this book for police responses documents - ‹ Previous Next › - View all
Clear search
Get this book in print ?Handbook of Domestic Violence Intervention Strategies: Policies, Programs ...By Albert R. RobertsAbout this book My library My History Terms of ServicePublished by Oxford University Press. Copyright.
24/03/2025  Health, safety, wellbeing and welfarehttps://www.college.police.uk/app/civil-emergencies/disaster-victim-identification/health-safety-and- welfare
Page
Health, safety, wellbeing and welfareThis page is from APP, the official source of professional practice for policing. First published23 October 2013 Updated18 January 2022Written by College of Policing Disaster victim identification 3 mins readIn major incidents, a wide range of physical or psychological hazards may be faced by either the public or emergency responders. All these hazards must be managed appropriately to prevent unacceptable risk to the safety of staff and public.Ensure that plans facilitate quick identification and hazard management at all stages of an incident. These plans should include pre-deployment assessments and major incident responses from initial report to recovery.Each emergency response agency is responsible for the health, safety, wellbeing, and welfare of its own staff. However, health and safety should also be coordinated through the strategic commander (or strategic coordination centre). Safety support and advice for emergency responders involved must link into this command structure by the formation of a health, safety, wellbeing and welfare cell at a tactical level. All agencies engaged in an operation of this nature, including external providers and contractors, must work effectively together to ensure the safety of all staff is paramount.An initial incident assessment is needed to identify any immediate potential hazards to staff and public. This will be a dynamic risk assessment as part of the Joint Emergency Interoperability Programme (JESIP) principles ( Joint Decision Model). There needs to be a joint understanding of risk between emergency response agencies.This is achieved by agreeing potential control measures through sharing information about the potential threats and hazards.For further information see HSE (2018) Striking the balance between operational and health and safety duties in the Police Service.
Incident safety advisory cellThe identified lead emergency responder should consider requesting the responding agencies to form an incident safety advisory cell. This cell will identify all significant hazards, set a safety strategy and ensure continuity of hazard identification. It will also ensure that risk control measures are appropriately managed by each agency.The incident safety advisory cell should comprise scientific advisors, operational practitioners and health, safety and medical professionals who are able to advise on relevant issues.Requirements of an incident safety advisory cellThe incident safety advisory cell should:  set the strategy for safety inform the tactical decision-making process provide timely and consistent safety critical strategies, information and instruction to all those affected or dealing with the incident implement the operational plan and support developing safety options to support informed joint decision making coordinate an oversight of safety and health advice and support, immediately advising on the incident hazard profile, supporting the assessment and monitoring of hazards and activity, recovering and cleaning upThis should include: hazard profiling the scene supporting the development of incident risk assessments and managing hazards, including safe systems of work providing pragmatic safety advice for an often-dynamic scenario and environment  post-event debriefing of staff and structured organisational learningOccupational health and welfareTo ensure that officers and staff are fit for the role, forces should have appropriate pre-screening selection processes, including health and psychological screening. These may include: vaccination for the role, including for overseas deployments where appropriate  periodic health monitoring pre-deployment health assessmentFollowing potential exposure to physical and chemical hazards, there should be post-incident monitoring. Any monitoring will be informed by the scene hazard profile and activity risk assessment developed during the incident. The DVI role also carries potential psychological exposure risk.Ensure that a robust and auditable process is in place to manage these physical and psychological hazards during and after deployment. Forces should have access to occupational health services and trained psychologists to support this process.For further information see Strategic Welfare Advice for the response to a mass fatalities incident (PDF 252KB).
Back to Disaster victim identification overviewTagsCivil emergencies
Body Armour Standard (2017)CAST Publication number: 012/17T PayneS O’Rourke C MalbonJuly 2017
SummaryThe Home Office has published test standards to assess the performance of body armour for over two decades dating back to 1993. In the intervening period, much has changed both operationally and from an engineering perspective in the ability to produce test methods that are more representative of the operational scenarios faced by end-users.The Home Office Body Armour Standard (2017) outlines the minimum performance requirements and test methods for body armour intended for UK law enforcement agencies.The requirements for this standard were derived from a series of consultations with stakeholders including the National Police Chiefs Council (NPCC), the Police Federation, end- users, manufacturers of body armour, accredited test facilities, the Metropolitan Police Service (MPS) Physical Protection Group and other technical experts.The key requirement for body armour is to reduce the risk of death or serious injury to the wearer from ballistic or stab attack to the torso in normal operational usage.Key improvements from the HOSDB1 Body Armour Standards for UK Police 2007 include:ï Formed armour testing: anthropometrically derived test surrogates, more representative of the morphologies of the female torso, enabling enhanced assessment of female body armour.ï Ballistic protection levels: an updated set of ballistic protection levels with test rounds reflecting the current operational requirements of UK law enforcement.ï Rifle testing: anthropometrically derived male front and back torso surrogates for ballistic testing to provide enhanced assessment on the performance of rifle protection.ï Production quality testing (PQT): introduction of critical perforation analysis (CPA) as a quality assurance tool to provide increased confidence in the continued production quality of soft armour.ï In-life monitoring (ILM): periodical assessment of in-service body armour over a period of time to ensure performance is maintained.Special acknowledgements are given to Dr Sam Ellis and Mike Hicks at the Defence Ordnance Safety Group (DOSG) for the development of the perforation analysis tool based on original work conducted by the MPS Physical Protection Group. Further thanks must also be given to Mark Helliker of the Defence Science and Technology Laboratory (Dstl) for his advice and support on ballistic elements of the standard.1 Home Office Scientific Development Branch, which became Centre for Applied Science and Technology (CAST) in April 2011.
Supplementary to the standard is a guidance document entitled Home Office Body Armour Standard (2017) – Guidance. This document has been written to be used alongside the standard and provides information to enable informed decision making in the selection and procurement of body armour and inform elements of best practice associated with its use.
NomenclatureAngle of incidenceThe angle formed between the bullets intended line of flight and the perpendicular to front surface of the backing material at the point of impact.Areal densityMass per unit area (kg.m-2).Armour carrierThe outer garment that contains the protective panels and holds them in the correct position against the body.Armour coverCover immediately encapsulating the protective panel.Armour model unique identifierUnique reference given to a specific certified armour construction. This may be referred to as an ‘armour model’ in this document.Associated panelsUnformed protective panels, of the same construction as formed armour.Back face signature (BFS)The maximum depth of indentation made by body armour into ballistic backing material after impact, measured perpendicular from the surface of the backing material.Backing materialTest medium positioned behind armour in ballistic, knife and spike tests.BatchA single complete production run of a given armour model.Batch referenceUnique reference given to a batch of certified armour.Body armourA complete construction of protective panels, front and rear, that provides protection within its coverage area. This may be referred to as ‘armour’ in the document.Body sideThe side of the protective panel that must be worn against the surface of the body.ConstructionA combination of constitutive materials from a protective panel for a given armour model.Critical perforation analysis (CPA)Test method to identify the velocity associated to a given statistical probability of body armour perforation.Declaration of constructionDocument, signed by the manufacturer, that declares the construction of a given armour model.DesignThe shape or style of a specific construction of protective panel.Development testingAny test work conducted by a manufacturer in the development process of body armour.
Extended coverage panelsAdditional panels of armour, of the same construction as unformed armour, intended to provide protection to areas other than the torso.Extreme temperature testingTesting of armour after pre-conditioning in an extreme temperature environment.Fair strikeAn impact that adheres to the specified minimum acceptable criteria in terms of strike placement and velocity requirements.FeatheringA gradual step down of armour layers around edges to enhance conformance, comfort and fit of the armour.Formed armourShaped panels of body armour which are not flat; typically designed for females.FragmentationSmall high velocity projectiles; often generated as a product of an explosive event or disintegration of a ballistic round.HeldNon-perforation of armour as a result of ballistic, knife or spike testing.In-life monitoring (ILM)Periodical testing of in-life armour to check continued operational performance.InvestigationAn examination of non-conformance to production quality testing requirements or in-service failure.PencillingA narrow indentation of soft body armour into the ballistic backing material in instances where the armour has not been perforated.PenetrationAny impact that results in the entry of an object through the strike face of the armour.PerforationAny impact resulting in a complete breach of the armour.PlatesHard armour designed to protect against specific test rounds, typically rifle and shotgun.Production quality testing (PQT)Periodic testing of certified armour to ensure production batches continue to perform at certification levels.Product life expectancyDuration over which protective panel is specified to provide the protection level it is being tested for.ProjectileA fired, thrown, or otherwise propelled object.Protective panelsConstituent panels of protective material of a given construction, enclosed in an armour cover. This may be referred to as ‘panels’ in the document, unless stated otherwise.Redacted technical fileReduced technical file providing information to enable test facilities to conduct pre-test assessments and construction checks.Shaped backingBacking material shaped to represent human torso
morphologies.Soft armourUnformed or formed armour without any plate elements.SpallDebris from the rear surface of the armour that is released as a result of a ballistic impact.Stab dampersDiscs of closed-cell foam, fitted into the knife sabot that increase the duration of knife impacts making them more representative of recorded human biomechanical data.Stab sabotDevice that supports the knife or spike in the guided-mass drop test assembly. This may be referred to as ‘sabot’ in the document.StandaloneAn armour intended to be worn independently of soft armour backing. Most commonly referred to in the context of plates.Strike faceThe surface of the body armour designated by the manufacturer to face the threat (the side oriented away from the body).Technical fileComprehensive document containing technical details pertaining to armour submitted for certification.Test seriesA set of fair strikes on a given protective panel.Unfair strikeAn impact that does not adhere to the specified minimum acceptable criteria in terms of strike placement or velocity.Unformed armourFlat panels of body armour.VTESTMaximum velocity specified within a protection level (e.g. HO1: 365 ± 10 m.s-1, VTEST: 375 m.s-1)V01The velocity of bullet, for given armour, at which 1% of shots are predicted to perforate and 99% are predicted to be held.V50The velocity of bullet, for given armour, at which 50% of shots are predicted to perforate and 50% are predicted to be held.Wet testingTesting of body armour after pre-conditioning submerged in water.YawThe angular deviation of a projectile about its longitudinal axis.
AbbreviationsBFSBack face signatureCASTCentre for Applied Science and TechnologyCATRACutlery and Allied Trades Research AssociationCPACritical perforation analysisDOSGDefence Ordnance Safety GroupDstlDefence Science and Technology LaboratoryFMJFull metal jacketHOHome OfficeHOSDBHome Office Scientific Development BranchILMIn-life monitoringInChI?International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (IUPAC) International Chemistry IdentifierISOInternational Organisation for StandardizationJHPJacketed hollow pointKRKnife resistance (protection level)MPSMetropolitan Police ServiceMQTManufacturers quality testingNPCCNational Police Chiefs CouncilPQTProduction quality testingSGShotgun (protection level)SPSpike resistance (protection level)SPLSingle penetration limitSSLSingle shot limit
Contents1. Introduction	11.1. Background	11.2. Rationale	11.3. Guidance	22. Scope	32.1. Inclusions	32.2. Exclusions	33. Manufacturers information	43.1. General information	43.2. Armour classifications	43.3. Sizing, coverage, covers and carriers	63.4. Labelling	73.5. Certification process	93.6. Declaration of construction	103.7. CAST approval to test	123.8. Sample submission	123.9. CAST checks and certification	123.10. Post certification	134. Summary of tests	144.1. Certification testing	144.2. Post-certification testing	154.3. Submission requirements	165. Pre-testing assessments	225.1. General information	225.2. Summary of assessments	225.3. Reporting	236. Ballistic testing	246.1. General ballistic testing requirements	246.2. Protection levels	256.3. Pre-test conditions	276.4. Sample preparation	296.5. Unformed armour testing	316.6. Formed armour testing	356.7. Plate testing	396.8. Critical perforation analysis	426.9. Additional ballistic tests	446.10. Extended coverage	456.11. Reporting	477. Stab testing	487.1. General stab testing requirements	487.2. Protection levels	497.3. Energy requirements	507.4. Environmental test conditions	501.1. 
7.5. Test equipment	507.6. Sample preparation	547.7. Unformed armour testing	577.8. Formed armour testing	617.9. Additional stab tests	637.10. Extended coverage panels	637.11. Reporting	648. Construction assessments	658.1. General requirements	658.2. Construction assessments	658.3. Reporting	659. Additional assessments	669.1. General requirements	669.2. Pre-conditioning	669.3. Reporting	6610. Production quality testing	6710.1. General requirements	6710.2. Frequency of assessment	6710.3. PQT submission requirements	6710.4. Pre-test checks	6910.5. Ballistic PQT	7010.6. Stab PQT	7110.7. Construction assessment	7310.8. Reporting	7310.9. PQT investigations	7311. In-life monitoring	75Appendix A: Declaration of construction	77Appendix B: Materials data sheet: technical requirements	78Appendix C: CAST accredited test facilities	80Appendix D: Test equipment and consumables	81
1. Introduction1.1. BackgroundThe Home Office have specified test standards for body armour intended for UK law enforcement for over two decades. These standards detail test methods and minimum performance requirements for body armour to provide levels of knife, spike and ballistic protection, primarily to the torso region.The first Home Office Body Armour Standard was written in 1993 and there have been three subsequent iterations published in 1999, 2003 and 2007. In each standard, a number of changes have been made in order to develop tests that are more consistent, practical, and representative of current operational threats to UK law enforcement. Notable features of each of these standards have been summarised:1993The first standard published by the Home Office, addressing knife threats for body armour. Revised in 1995 to cover ballistic threats.1999Major revision to the 1993 standard including the introduction of a guided-mass knife drop test; composite knife test backing material; non-edged spike testing; and, tiered protection levels to address a range of severities of knife, spike and ballistic threat.2003Introduction of a HG1/A ballistic protection level with additional permissible back face signature (BFS) to hand gun threats.2007Major revision of the 2003 standard including increased protection levels to address more powerful hand gun (HG3) and rifle (RF2) weaponry; in-production manufacturers quality testing (MQT); and increased number of knife, spike and ballistic compliance tests.The Home Office Body Armour Standard (2017) supersedes all previous Home Office Body Armour standards. Any certification to previous standards remains extant provided the manufacturer, where applicable, complies with the requirements of MQT within the respective standard.1.2. RationaleSince the 2007 standard, the Home Office Centre for Applied Science and Technology (CAST) has engaged with a range of stakeholders to establish a set of operational requirements for the Home Office Body Armour Standard (2017). These included the National Police Chiefs Council (NPCC), the Police Federation, end-users, manufacturers of body armour, test facilities and technical experts.These requirements provided direction for a body of work to produce a test standard that better represented the needs of end-users. The key requirement for body armour is to reduce the risk of death or serious injury to the wearer from ballistic or stab attack to the torso in normal operational usage.
Key differences from the HOSDB Body Armour Standards for UK Police 2007 include:ï Formed armour testing: anthropometrically derived test surrogates, more representative of the morphologies of the female torso enabling enhanced assessment of female body armour.ï Ballistic protection levels: an updated set of ballistic protection levels with test rounds reflecting the current operational requirements of UK law enforcement.ï Rifle testing: anthropometrically derived male front and back torso surrogates for ballistic testing to provide enhanced assessment on the performance of rifle protection.ï Production quality testing (PQT): introduction of critical perforation analysis (CPA) as a quality assurance tool to provide increased confidence in the continued production quality of soft armour.ï In-life monitoring (ILM): periodical assessment of in-service body armour over a period of time to ensure performance is maintained.1.3. GuidanceA supplementary guidance document is also available, Home Office Body Armour Standard (2017) – Guidance (Publication No. 039/17), providing additional information on the intended use of the standard. This document has been written to be used alongside the standard and provides information to enable informed decision making in the selection and procurement of body armour and inform elements of best practice associated with its use.
2. Scope2.1. InclusionsThis standard has been written to address the operational requirements of UK law enforcement when faced with ballistic threats from firearms, edged (knife) and non-edged (spike) weapons. The primary region of consideration in this standard is the torso, addressing frontal and rear impacts. Auxiliary to this, protection for areas of extended coverage (e.g. shoulder, neck) interfacing with the body armour in the torso region has also been included.Within this standard, to ensure continued performance in the production of the body armour, periodic PQT has been included. Similarly, to ensure continued performance of in-use operational armours, periodic ILM of armour has been included.Body armour certified to this standard is deemed to be ballistic and/or stab resistant only. Certification to this standard ensures that the armour meets the minimum performance requirements only. It is the responsibility of the end-user to ensure that the body armour addresses their particular requirements. It is the responsibility of the manufacturer to ensure the continued quality of their product.2.2. ExclusionsElements not directly addressed by this standard include protection against:ï Slash: attacks characterised by a short duration swipe of a bladed weapon across the body.ï Fragmentation: characterised by small high velocity projectiles, often generated as a product of an explosive event.ï Blunt trauma: characterised by relatively low velocity, high mass impacts with a blunt interface (e.g. thrown objects, road traffic accidents).Although the body armour produced in compliance with this standard has not been designed to address the above impact types, it may indirectly provide a level of protection. Other Home Office standards directly address the requirements for blunt trauma and slash resistant protective clothing:HOSDB Slash Resistance Standard for UK Police (45/05) (2006)HOSDB Blunt Trauma Protector Standard for UK Police (20/07) (2007)
3. Manufacturers information3.1. General informationThis section details the requisite procedures for the certification of body armour intended for law enforcement.Certification only applies to a particular model of armour, manufactured in accordance with the manufacturer’s technical file. No changes to the construction are permitted under this certification without prior notification to CAST. CAST shall assess changes on a case-by-case basis and these may be subject to further testing, in accordance with the methods documented within this standard. Any armour which fails in certification cannot be re-submitted using the same construction.Each body armour produced post certification shall have a unique serial number identifying the individual armour. Manufacturers are responsible for ensuring continued performance of their armour, via their quality assurance process. In addition, manufacturers shall adhere to the PQT and, where applicable, ILM procedures outlined within this standard.CAST reserve the right to spot check armour at any time should it be considered necessary.If there are significant concerns relating to the safety or quality of any armour, CAST reserves the right to withhold or remove certification.All certification testing must be performed at one of CAST’s accredited test facilities (Appendix C). Manufacturers may witness testing of their own products at accredited test facilities, subject to agreement with the facility, but are prohibited from interfering with test protocol.Details of certified products will be shared on a public database. The following information will be published (if a manufacturer does not wish for their product to be included on the database this shall be made clear during the submission process).ï Manufacturer name.ï Armour model unique identifier (model reference).ï Protection level(s).ï Certification expiry date (date after which, the armour certification is no longer valid and requires a PQT certificate).ï PQT test reference (once minimum test criteria met).3.2. Armour classifications3.2.1. Protection levelsThere are three main categories of protection within the standard: ballistic, knife, and knife with spike. Body armour submitted for certification testing can be assessed to multiple protection
levels within and between protection categories. For example, a single body armour could be tested for multiple ballistic protection levels as well as knife and spike protection.3.2.2. Types of armourFor the purposes of this standard, body armour has been classified into the following groups.Unformed armour:Flat protective panels, typically designed for male end-users. If these unformed panels are intended for female wearers, they shall be tested in accordance with formed armour test methods outlined in Sections 6.6 and Section 7.8.Formed armour:Protective panels which are not flat and shaped to conform to the wearer, of particular relevance in female armour.Formed armour submitted for testing must have equivalent unformed armour of the same construction, tested in accordance with the unformed ballistic (Section 6.5.) and stab methods (Section 7.7), as applicable. If there is no equivalent certified unformed armour, this can be achieved:ï if the formed front panel is of exactly the same material lay-up and construction (excluding any methods used for shaping2) as the unformed armour model, it shall be associated with a rear panel of that model;ï if the formed front panel is a soft armour and of a unique construction, unformed armour panels shall be purpose made and supplied to enable certification testing of the construction to be completed. Such panels shall be of equivalent sizing to the formed armour submitted for testing. The unformed panels assessed in this instance are referred to as ‘associated’ panels.When certified, a formed front panel may be supplied with any rear panel from the same manufacturer that is of the same protection level(s).Plates:Hard armour designed to protect against specific test rounds, typically rifle and shotgun. Either considered standalone or in conjunction with a specified (formed or unformed) certified backing armour.Extended coverage panels:Additional panels designed to offer protection outside of the main torso region. For example, shoulder, groin or neck guards.Extended coverage panels shall either be of the same construction as certified unformed armour or the manufacturer shall supply associated unformed panels of the same construction for assessment in accordance with unformed ballistic (Section 6.5) and stab methods (Section 7.7), as applicable.If extended coverage panels do not meet minimum performance requirements, this does not affect the equivalent certified unformed armour.2 No additional material shall be added.
3.2.3. Scalable solutionsScalable solutions refer to the combination of more than one protective panel to achieve an enhanced level of protection. This is permissible within the standard, provided that the scalable solution is:ï assessed as individual panels prior to combining;ï assessed together in all certification tests;ï sold in the configuration tested with explicit guidance for the user on its composite construction and wear instructions;ï re-submitted for certification when any modification is made to the certified scalable solution.3.3. Sizing, coverage, covers and carriers3.3.1. SizingThe armour shall be available in a range of sizes to ensure a close fit to the user’s body and allow for variation in size and build of the end-user population. It shall also be adjustable to ensure fit against body and accommodate a modest variation in the size of the end-user.Feathering at the sides of the protective panels may be adopted to enhance the comfort of the body armour.3.3.2. CoverageBody armour should provide protection to the vital organs. A formal coverage assessment is not included in this standard; however, this should be addressed as part of any police procurement. Guidelines on coverage requirements are presented in the 2017 Home Office Body Armour Standard (2017) – Guidance (Publication No. 039/17).CAST reserves the right to evaluate and review certification of any armour based on its coverage against these guidelines.3.3.3. Armour coversCovers enclosing the protective panels shall be waterproof to a hydrostatic head of 5,000 mm in accordance with ISO 811:1981 and fully sealed unless the manufacturer can provide evidence to CAST that adequately demonstrates the protective materials are not affected by moisture.3Where the body armour contains plates with affixed protective elements or backing materials, these shall be securely adhered to the plate such that they could not be inconspicuously removed.The armour covers provided for certification shall be identical to those sold. If, post certification, a manufacturer wishes to add any additional covers to the panels, they shall inform CAST. Such covers shall conform to the labelling requirements of Section 3.4. Any subsequent batch or PQT shall be performed without this additional cover.3 This evidence is not the same as the optional pre-conditioning wet testing specified in certification.
3.3.4. Armour carriersIf the protective panels are to be inserted into a carrier, it may be of overt or covert design. The design of the carrier may differ according to the requirements of the end-user; however, it shall ensure that the panels are held securely against the body over the intended part of the torso. Where possible, the protective panels should be removable from the armour carrier to permit laundering.Assessment of the operational armour carrier is not always required as part of certification testing. Where a carrier is required for testing (e.g. plates in conjunction with unformed armour), it shall be specified explicitly in the relevant sections. In these instances, protective panels submitted for testing shall be provided in a plain, single-layer armour carrier of areal density not exceeding 220 g.m-2.All zips on the armour carrier shall be covered to reduce the risk of fragmentation injury from bullet impacts.CAST reserve the right to specify additional assessments of the operational carrier if deemed necessary.3.4. Labelling3.4.1. General requirementsA label shall be securely fixed to the body side of each protective panel so that it is visible to the wearer. The label shall be at least 75 ? 75 mm and include as a minimum:ï manufacturer name;ï date of manufacture;ï batch reference;ï armour model unique identifier (model reference);ï unique item identifier (serial number);ï protection level (e.g. HO1 + KR1);ï front or back panel identifier;ï identification of ‘body side’ using the following text, with text height of at least 10 mm: ‘THIS SIDE TO THE BODY’;4ï colour-coded labels to identify protection type (see Figure 1);ï care and maintenance instructions;ï for certification test panels, a separate label shall be used with the following statement clearly visible: ‘THIS IS A TEST PANEL ONLY, DO NOT WEAR’;ï for certified panels, the test house reference shall be shown;5ï if panels have been pre-conditioned in accordance with Section 9.2, the label shall clearly state either ‘Wet Tested’ or ‘Extreme Temperature Tested’;ï if the panels have been tested with additional test rounds, these shall be clearly stated on the label.Unless otherwise specified, text on the label shall have a minimum height of 3 mm.4 This may be affixed to the panel as an additional label if necessary.5 This shall include original certification reference plus the most recent PQT reference (where applicable).
For extended coverage panels, where there is a tapering in panel geometry defined based on the criteria outlined in Section 6.10.2. The manufacturer may choose to identify an area of full protection; this area shall be marked with the text ‘AREA OF FULL PROTECTION’ on the strike face of the panel.On scalable solutions, where multiple protective panels are used in combination, labels adhering to the specified requirements shall be provided on the body side of each panel. The label shall clearly detail the protection levels of the individual panels and the protection level of the resultant combination of panels. Further instruction shall be explicitly displayed on the labels outlining the order in which panels must be worn, with features added to prevent incorrect orders (e.g. physical fastening).Figure 1: Examples of colour-coded labels to be affixed to protective panels – blue circle for ballistic protection, red triangle for stab protection, green square for ballistic and knife and ballistic, knife and spike protection3.4.2. Labelling assessmentThe label should be fully readable to anyone with normal or corrected vision throughout its product life expectancy (plus two years). Manufacturers should assess the longevity of labels prior to production.If labels degrade and become unreadable in service, they shall be replaced immediately at the cost of the manufacturer.It is the responsibility of the end-user to ensure the product continues to meet these requirements.
3.5. Certification processFigure 2 outlines the key elements involved in the submission of armour for testing in order to achieve certification to this standard.Any testing completed outside of this process will be considered as development testing only and results will not be accepted as part of the certification process.Figure 2: Process map for certification to the 2017 Home Office Body Armour Standard
3.6. Declaration of constructionFor each model of armour, a completed declaration of construction (Appendix A), shall be submitted via email to declarations@homeoffice.gsi.gov.uk. This shall be supported by both a comprehensive technical file and redacted technical file. The subject of the email shall follow the naming convention: [Manufacturer] – [Armour Model Unique Identifier] – [Protection Level] – [Chosen Test Facility].63.6.1. Technical fileThe technical file shall be submitted in a PDF file format on company headed paper and detail the following information as a minimum:ï Company details:* name;* postal address;* named point of contact including telephone number and email address;* proof of accreditation to a recognised quality standard (e.g. ISO 9001).ï Details of any subcontractors used:* company details (as above);* proof of accreditation to a recognised quality assurance standard (e.g. ISO 9001);* details of process or products supplied;* full technical file for products supplied.7ï Armour model unique identifier (model reference).ï Protection level(s).ï Panel construction material lay-up (from strike face to body side).ï Carrier designs (examples).ï Full details of all materials used within the construction:* material manufacturer company details (as above);* location of manufacturing facility for material;* material data sheets – details in Appendix B.ï Technical drawings of armour design (including both formed and unformed as applicable):* complete details of the size roll anticipated by manufacturer at point of certification(full size roll) including scale drawings with key dimensions and areal coverage.* detail of any feathering (if applicable).ï Labelling templates and example (Section 3.4):* wording;* fixing methods;* fixing location.ï Product life expectancy – specified duration over which armour materials are known to provide the protection level it is being tested for and evidence to support this. Acceptable evidence must include destructive testing on the particular combination of6 It is the responsibility of the manufacturer, prior to submission of the technical file, to arrange testing with one of CAST’s approved test facilities (Appendix C).7 May be supplied directly to CAST from sub-contractor if required.
materials in the armour construction evaluated over at least the period of time specified in the product life expectancy.8ï Internal batch testing regime – details of internal test methods (both non-destructive and destructive) and frequency of testing.3.6.2. Changes in panel size/designIf, during production, the manufacturer is required to manufacture a size of protective panel with an areal coverage more than 5% outside of the range specified in the technical file, CAST should be contacted for advice. Any change in design where a measurement is moved closer to either the vertical or horizontal centrelines in the armour by more than 15% of its original distance, CAST should be contacted for advice. Figure 3 illustrates an example of the measurements required to identify a change in design.xo – original horizontal measurement; yo – original vertical measurement; xr – revised horizontal measurement; yr – revised vertical measurementFigure 3: Armour with centrelines and measurements marked for design consideration3.6.3. Redacted technical fileA redacted technical file shall also be provided to CAST for review at the declaration stage to enable test facility pre-test assessments and construction checks.9 This redacted technical file shall contain:ï drawings of panels submitted (including feathering and areal coverage);ï type of material (e.g. woven, laminated);ï number of layers;ï quilting and construction details (e.g. stitching pattern).All technical files will be protectively marked as ‘OFFICIAL SENSITIVE [COMMERICAL]’ with handling instructions ‘For use by the Home Office, stated manufacturer and stated test facility only, unless otherwise agreed by all parties’ and kept on record for a minimum of five years.8 If such evidence cannot be satisfactorily presented to CAST, the armour shall be subject to ILM (Section 11).9 The manufacturer is responsible for ensuring any confidentiality agreement with their selected test facility is in place, as required.
3.7. CAST approval to testOnce the declaration and associated technical files have been submitted, CAST will review and decide whether the submission meets the requirements for certification testing. On acceptance, CAST will authorise the selected CAST accredited test facility to initiate the certification testing process.10In exceptional circumstances CAST may provisionally accept the armour for testing prior to full acceptance of the technical file and declaration. If this is required by the manufacturer, a full justification explaining why it is necessary shall be provided to CAST for consideration.Certification will not be completed until all documentation is accepted by CAST.3.8. Sample submissionOn approval of the declaration, the manufacturer shall send armour samples, corresponding to the requirements of Section 4.3 for testing to their chosen CAST accredited test facility. It is the manufacturer’s responsibility to ensure that the appropriate quantity of test samples are provided to the CAST accredited test facility for testing to the protection level(s) specified.These samples shall be accompanied with a redacted technical file (Section 3.6.3). It is the responsibility of the manufacturer to ensure appropriate export licences are sought and export protocol is followed in the submission of armour and information to test facilities.3.9. CAST checks and certificationOn receipt of test reports from the accredited test facility, CAST will independently review them. If successful, CAST will then issue the manufacturer with a certificate detailing the outcomes of the test and pertinent information on the performance of armour. This shall include:ï manufacturer’s name;ï manufacturer’s address;ï armour type (unformed armour, formed armour, plate or extended coverage panel);ï protection level(s);ï accredited size range (smallest to largest);11ï available as (form in which armour supplied);ï areal density;ï performance metrics (ballistic: V50, mean BFS; stab: mean depth of penetration);ï additional testing (wet/extreme temperature);ï product life expectancy;ï in-life monitoring;ï original test house reference;ï current PQT test reference;ï current ILM test reference;ï issue date;ï expiry date.10 Any testing conducted prior to receipt of CAST authorisation will be considered as development testing only and will not form part of the certification testing process.11 For formed armour, this shall be given by the size range of the equivalent unformed armour.
On certification, manufacturers shall send a sealed medium sample of the certified armour to CAST for audit purposes.3.10. Post certification3.10.1. Production quality testingOnce an armour model has been certified, it is automatically subject to the PQT protocol. Independent assessments are specified at a series of intervals to ensure the performance of armour during production remains at the certified levels. Details of the threshold frequencies for PQT and test methods are documented in Section 10.3.10.2. In-life monitoringIn instances where the manufacturer is unable to provide sufficient information to support their specified product life expectancy, armour models will be subject to the ILM protocol. In this scheme, in-service armour will be retrieved from end-users every two years for testing to provide greater confidence in its continued performance in the field.Manufacturers may also wish to opt in to this scheme, which shall be indicated to CAST on submission of the declaration. Details on the ILM protocol are documented in Section 11.
4. Summary of tests4.1. Certification testingA summary of the certification tests within this standard have been given in Table 1.Table 1: Summary of assessments for certification testingSection3.4LabellingVisual inspection of labelling ensuring required information is presented and it is of appropriate quality.Pre-testing5Pre-testing assessmentsInspections and areal density measurements on submitted body armour, against the redacted technical file, prior to testing.Ballistic testing6.5Soft, unformedAssessment of unformed (i.e. flat) body armour against a flat Roma Plastilina® No. 1 tray backing.6.6Soft, formedAssessment of formed body armour (e.g. armours intended for females) against a Plastiline® 40 torso-shaped backing.6.7PlatesAssessment of plates, either standalone or in conjunction with a certified soft armour protective panel, against a Roma Plastilina® No. 1 torso-shaped backing. If intended for female users (standalone or in conjunction with certified formed or unformed armour), an assessment shall be conducted on large female Plastiline® 40 torso-shaped backing. Any such armour shall have an equivalent certified plate tested on the Roma Plastilina® No. 1 male torso-shaped backing.6.8Critical perforation analysis (CPA)Conducted only after successful completion of other ballistic testing, CPA is an assessment of the velocity associated to a given statistical probability of body armour perforation. This test determines the velocity at which 1% of shots are predicted to perforate the armour being tested, V01, as well as the velocity at which 50% of shots are predicted to perforate the armour being tested, V50.
Section6.10Extended coverage (optional)Assessment of extended coverage panels such as groin, shoulder or neck protectors against Roma Plastilina® No. 1 backing. Note that extended coverage panels that fail to meet the requirement do not affect the certification of the torso panels of the same construction.Knife/spike testing7.7Soft, unformedAssessment of unformed body armour on flat composite foam-based backing materials in a guided-mass, gravity-driven drop test system against knife and/or spike end-effectors.7.8Soft, formedAssessment of formed body armour on a Plastiline® 40 shaped backing in a guided-mass, gravity-driven drop test system against knife and/or spike end-effectors.7.10Extended coverage (optional)Assessment of extended coverage panels on flat composite foam-based backing materials in a guided-mass, gravity-driven drop test system against knife and/or spike end-effectors. Note that extended coverage panels that fail to meet the requirement do not affect the certification of torso panels of the same construction.Post-testing8Construction assessmentsInspection of all tested protective panels to ensure they have been manufactured in accordance with the manufacturer’s declaration of construction and technical file.4.2. Post-certification testingA summary of the post-certification tests within this standard have been given in Table 2.Table 2: Summary of assessments for post-certification testingSection9.2.1Wet testing (optional)To simulate body armour being immersed in water prior to being worn, this assessment preconditions the certified individual protective panel in water before ballistic and/or stab testing.9.2.2Extreme temperature testing (optional)To simulate body armour being stored in extreme temperatures prior to being worn, this assessment preconditions certified individual protective panels at either +50°C or -20°C and allows them to return to standard temperature prior to ballistic and/or stab testing.
Section10Production quality testing (PQT)In ballistic testing, CPA shall be performed on soft unformed armour. Soft, formed armour and plates shall be tested in the same manner as in certification testing but with fewer panels required.Similarly, stab testing shall be conducted in the same manner as certification but at reduced quantities compared to certification testing.11In-life monitoring (ILM)To ensure armour exhibits consistent performance for the duration of the product life expectancy (as specified by the manufacturer), in-service panels shall be acquired and tested.4.3. Submission requirements4.3.1. Size selection4.3.1.1. Unformed armourThree armour sizes are required for certification testing: small, medium and large. Small shall be the smallest panel that the manufacturer intends to supply. Large shall be the largest panel that the manufacturer intends to supply. Medium shall be sized to fit the dimensioned torso mannequin, shown in Figure 4. Key dimensions are provided in Table 3. The range of sizes specified and tested shall be included as the accredited range on the certificate.If, at a later stage, the manufacturer is required to produce armour that is outside of the range defined in the technical file and the changes are not covered by the criteria in Section 3.6.2, they shall inform CAST and provide full details of the new panel size. It may be necessary to complete additional testing on these panels.All assessments on unformed armour shall be conducted without carriers.
                      Figure 4: Dimensioned medium male torso Table 3: Male torso dimensionsNo.ColourMeasurementDescriptionDimension (mm)1BlueWaist circumferenceMeasured at top of waist.9402TealStomach circumferenceMeasured at the most pronounced region of the stomach.9553PurpleChest circumferenceMeasured at the most pronounced region of the chest.1,0404BlackFront torso lengthMeasured front the jugular notch to the top of the waist.3905MaroonRear torso lengthMeasured from the 7th vertebrae to the top of the waist.4506GreenWidth between armsSpan across chest, measured from deepest point of arm pits.5107OrangeWaist-to-waist (front to rear)Measured distance from the front waist over the highest part of the shoulder to the rear waist.980
4.3.1.2. Formed armourFormed armour required for certification shall be supplied in two sizes based on the female mannequins in Figure 5 and Figure 6. Key dimensions are provided in Table 4.All assessments on formed armour shall be conducted in carriers following the requirements outlined in Section 3.3.4.Figure 5: Dimensioned small female torsoFigure 6: Dimensioned large female torso
Table 4: Female torso dimensionsNo.ColourMeasurementDescriptionDimension (mm) Small female torsoLarge female torso1PurpleBust circumferenceMeasured at the most pronounced region of the bust.9101,0402TealBelow bust circumferenceMeasured just beneath the bust.7859303BlueWaist circumferenceMeasured at top of waist.6959204GreenFront torso lengthMeasured from the jugular notch to the top of the waist.3453605GreyRear torso lengthMeasured from the seventh vertebrae to the top of the waist.4004406OrangeBust heightMeasured from the top of waist to the most pronounced region of the bust.1801907MaroonFront shoulder heightTop of waist to highest point of the shoulder (over bust).4304608BlackWaist-to-waist (front to rear)Measured distance from the front waist over the highest part of the shoulder to the rear waist.8909309WhiteBust widthSpan between most pronounced regions of each bust.17520510BeigeWidth between armsSpan across chest, measured from deepest point of arm pits.4354704.3.1.3. PlatesPlates (standalone or in conjunction with certified unformed armour) submitted for certification shall be supplied to fit the male torso mannequin specified in Table 3.If plates are intended for female end-users (standalone or in conjunction with certified formed or unformed armour) they shall be sized to fit the female large front mannequin. Note any plates shaped for female users must have an equivalent plate, of the same construction, tested on Roma Plastilina® No. 1 shaped backing in accordance with the methods outlined in Section6.7. If there is not already an equivalent certified plate, purpose-made plates shall be submitted in accordance the quantity requirements in Section 0 and the test methods outlined in Section 6.7.All assessments on plates shall be conducted in carriers following the requirements outlined in Section 3.3.4.
4.3.1.4. Extended coverage panelsTwo sizes of extended coverage panel are required for certification of each design of panel, small and large. Small shall be the smallest panel that the manufacturer intends to supply. Large shall be the largest panel that the manufacturer intends to supply. The range of sizes specified and tested shall be included as the accredited range on the certificate.If the extended coverage panels are made from soft armour constructions, they shall have an equivalent certified unformed armour. Hard extended coverage panels (plates) shall have an equivalent certified full-sized plate.4.3.2. Quantities of armour requiredTable 5 and Table 6 show the number of panels required for each protection level for certification testing in accordance with the requirements of Sections 6 and7.For ballistic testing to HO3, HO4 and SG1 protection levels, plates may be assessed as standalone products or in conjunction with previously certified HO1 or HO2 panels which have been assessed and certified accordingly.Refer to Section 10 for PQT.Table 5: Quantities of armour required for ballistic test certificationF = front panel; B = back panel; dark grey boxes – no panels required.12 All formed armour submitted for testing shall be sized in accordance with specifications in Section 0.13 All plates submitted for testing shall be sized in accordance with specifications in Section 4.3.1.3.
* If intended for female end-users (standalone or in conjunction with certified soft armour), an additional two plates are required, sized to fit the female large torso mannequin.** A single small and large extended coverage panel is required per ammunition type at each protection level.Table 6: Quantities of armour required for knife/spike test certificationProtection levelPanel typeSize (all front)SmallMediumLargeKR1 or KR2Unformed111Formed11Extended coverage11KR1 + SP1 or KR2 + SP2Unformed212Formed22Extended coverage22
5. Pre-testing assessments5.1. General informationOn submission of samples for testing, test facilities shall be supplied with a redacted technical file from the manufacturer containing the details specified in Section 3.6.3. This technical file shall be used in assessments to enable comparisons with the supplied armour.5.2. Summary of assessments5.2.1. InspectionInitially, on receipt of armour from the manufacturer, a visual inspection shall be performed to assess general quality of construction. Defects such as damage, blisters, cracks, tears, fraying and stitching separation shall be recorded.5.2.2. Areal densityPrior to testing, all submitted protective panels shall be weighed outside of their carriers on a calibrated set of scales, accurate to 0.1 g. The size of each panel, excluding armour covers, shall then be checked against dimensioned drawings provided by the manufacturer. This shall include, as a minimum, the overall width (largest separation in horizontal axis), overall height (largest separation in vertical axis), height and width of tapered regions, as shown in Figure 7.Figure 7: Dimensional measurements on submitted armourOn these drawings the manufacturer shall provide confirmation of the surface area of each panel construction submitted. The mass of the protective panels and associated areas shall then be used with the stated area to calculate areal density.
Should there be a deviation between the drawings provided by the manufacturer and the dimensions measured of greater than 5% in any single measurement, the area of the panel shall be calculated manually by tracing around the perimeter of the armour using PolyartTM paper (140 g.m-2, 0.175 mm thickness).14 This paper shall then be weighed and used to calculate areal density using Equation (3).?????????? ?????????????? (????. ???2) =  ???????? ???? ???????????? (????) ? ?????????? ?????????????? ???? ?????????? (????. ???2)???????? ???? ??????????(????)  (3)Such discrepancies shall be recorded and reported to CAST.5.3. ReportingInspection notes and areal densities shall be recorded in the template provided by CAST15 along with any associated relevant information (e.g. photographs). This spreadsheet shall be submitted with test reports on completion of testing.All test reports will be protectively marked as ‘OFFICIAL SENSITIVE [COMMERICAL]’ with handling instructions ‘for use by the Home Office, stated manufacturer and stated test facility only, unless otherwise agreed by all parties and kept on record for a minimum of five years’.14 The areal density of the paper shall be measured prior to calculation.15 Available on request to CAST.
6. Ballistic testing6.1. General ballistic testing requirements6.1.1. Performance assessment criteriaAll ballistic armour, regardless of protection level, shall satisfy the following requirements. Following a fair strike:ï no bullet shall completely pass through (perforate) the protective panel;ï no part of the bullet shall be visible from the body side of the protective panel;16ï no bullet or part of the bullet shall exit from the sides of the protective panel;ï no spall or fragments of hard armour (e.g. ceramic plate, pieces of metal) shall enter the backing material;ï the BFS measurements shall not exceed the limits specified according to the protection level being assessed (see Table 8).6.1.2. Fair strikeA fair strike shall be recorded if:ï the shot velocity is within the specified range;ï shot placement rules are adhered to;ï unless otherwise specified, the shot is perpendicular to the target.17In any fair series of strikes, the mean of all velocities in a certification test series at a given protection level shall equal or exceed the specified velocity (e.g. for an armour submitted for HO1 testing, the mean of all shots must be 365 m.s-1 or greater).6.1.3. ExceptionsThe following conditions represent exceptions to the fair strike criteria for ballistic testing:ï If the shot velocity is below the specified range but the armour is perforated this shall be classed as a fair strike.ï If the shot velocity is above the specified range, the armour is not perforated and the BFS is within the defined limits; this may be classed as a fair strike upon acceptance by the manufacturer. Beyond this point, any subsequent fair strikes are considered acceptable.ï If the shot placement rules are not adhered to, the armour is not perforated and the BFS is within the defined limits; this may be classed as a fair strike upon acceptance16 Assessed on the last layer (body side) of ballistic material within the panel construction.17 It is assumed that the shot is perpendicular if the barrel is perpendicular to the target. If the manufacturer wishes to assess yaw, they may request this to be conducted at their own cost.
by the manufacturer. Beyond this point, any subsequent fair strikes are considered acceptable.Any strikes that do not meet the fair strike criteria and are not covered by the exceptions shall be recorded as unfair. If an unfair strike is recorded another shot location that complies with the shot placement rules shall be identified by the test facility and an additional shot shall be placed in this location. A maximum of seven shots shall be taken on unformed medium/large protective panels and a maximum of four shots shall be taken on unformed small panels in a test series. No additional strikes may be conducted on formed panels. If there is an unfair strike, an additional formed armour panel shall be provided for testing.6.1.4. Shot placement rulesShots shall be placed in accordance with shot patterns defined in Section 6.4.2. In all circumstances the shot placement rules in Table 7 shall be adhered to. The reference point for these distances is the edge of a shot entry hole.Table 7: Ballistic shot placement rulesPanel typeMin. shot-to-shot distanceMin. shot-to-edge distance18Unformed50 mm50 mmFormedN/AN/APlates75 mm50 mmExtended coverageN/AN/A6.2. Protection levelsBallistic protection levels for certification are given in Table 8.18 Distances specified from shot entry hole to the edge of the armour and/or the edge of the backing material.
Table 8: Ballistic protection levelsProtection levelClassification and calibreTest round designationBullet massRange (min)(m)Max. mean BFS(mm)Single shot BFS limit (mm)Velocity (m.s-1)HO19 mm FMJMEN 9 mm FMJ DM11A1B28.0 g(124grain)544.0365 ± 109 mm JHPFederal Premium 9 mm JHP P9HST18.0 g(124grain)544.0365 ± 10HO29mm FMJMEN 9 mm FMJ DM11A1B28.0 g(124grain)544.0430 ± 109 mm JHPFederal Premium 9 mm JHP P9HST18.0 g(124grain)544.0430 ± 10HO3Rifle 7.62 calibreRadway Green7.62 mm NATOBall L44A1 or L2A29.3 g(144grain)1025.030.0830 ± 15Rifle 7.62 calibre7.62 ? 39 mmsurrogate197.9 g(122grain)1025.030.0705 ± 15HO420Rifle 7.62 calibreSAKO .308 Win480A Powerhead or Barnes .308 TSX BT10.7 g(165grain)1025.030.0820 ± 15SG1   Shotgun 12 gauge TrueCylinderWinchester 1 oz. Rifled 12RSE28.4 g1025.030.0435 ± 25SpecialBased on threat and risk assessmentAt each protection level, manufacturers are responsible for the performance of product at all velocities below the specified test ranges.The mean permissible BFS measurements have been specified in Table 8.For all protection levels a single shot limit (SSL) has been defined, which gives a maximum BFS limit for a single ballistic shot of a given test round in each protection level for a test series.19 7.62 x 39 mm surrogate round details provided in Appendix D.20 Any armour submitted for testing to the HO4 protection level shall also meet the requirements of the HO3 protection level.
If standalone plates (without soft armour) are submitted for assessment, consideration should be given to satisfy the ballistic certification requirements of the HO2 protection level using the rifle shot templates and methods outlined in Section 6.7.The protection levels listed in Table 8 are defined as minimum protection levels. If, based on the threat and risk assessment, there is a requirement to incorporate additional ammunition this may be done either in addition to any protection level or, for specialist uses, on its own as a ‘special’ protection level.Consideration should be given to the requirement to assess any protection level against UK law enforcement ammunition. Due to potential variation in law enforcement ammunition this has not been included in the protection levels. This should be incorporated, as an enhancement, into the relevant protection level for specialist users.Examples of ‘special’ test rounds that may be used include, but are not limited to, the rounds specified in Table 9.Table 9: Additional ‘special’ test roundsProtection levelClassification and calibreTest round designationBullet massRange (min)(m)Max. mean BFS(mm)Single shot BFS limit (mm)Velocity (m.s-1)Special0.357”MagnumSoft Point Flat Nose Remington R357M310.2 g544.0390 ± 10455 ± 10Special5.56 ? 45 mm SS1095.56 ? 45 mmBall L17A1 or L15A14.01 g(62grain)1025.030.0920 ± 15SpecialCarbine5.56 ? 45 mm NATOFederal Tactical Bonded5.56 mm (.223) LE223T34.01 g(62grain)1025.030.0750 ± 156.3. Pre-test conditions6.3.1. Environmental conditionsThe firing range shall be maintained at a temperature of 20 ± 3°C. Storage rooms and any associated areas shall be maintained at a temperature of 20 ± 3°C with a 40 to 70% relative humidity. The working temperature and relative humidity of all areas shall be recorded on the test report.6.3.2. Test equipment6.3.2.1. Calibration and recordsAll test equipment listed in this section shall be calibrated in accordance with the internal quality management system. Calibration records shall be made available to CAST upon
request. All accredited test facilities shall have equipment approved by CAST. Details of equipment used during each test shall be recorded on the test report.6.3.2.2. Velocity measurementAll velocities shall be measured at a distance of 2.0 ± 0.1 m from the front face of the test panel to the centre of the position of velocity measurement. The velocity of each test shot shall be within the limits specified in Table 8. Velocity shall be recorded in metres per second (m.s-1) and rounded to the nearest integer value.The following velocity measurement equipment may be used:ï Doppler radar calibrated with errors no greater than ± 1.0% within the specified test ranges.ï Light gates with minimum sampling rate of 100 kHz and base length of 1.0 ± 0.5 m.Alternative systems may be used; however, these must first be approved by CAST.To attain the correct striking distances and velocities detailed in Table 8, static mounted proof barrels, alignment aids and hand loading of the rounds shall be adopted.6.3.2.3. Back face signature measurementA suitable method of measuring the BFS shall be used. It shall be accurate to ± 0.1 mm. If using a Vernier calliper, it shall have an 8 mm diameter hemispherical probe. Figure 8 illustrates a suggested tool for such measurement.Figure 8: Example of a BFS measurement tool6.3.3. Test configurationTest equipment shall be set up so that the minimum distance from the muzzle of the test barrel to the front surface of the target shall be 5 metres for protection levels HO1 and HO2, and a minimum of 10 metres for protection levels HO3, HO4 and SG1. Minimum muzzle-to-target distances for special ammunition are defined in Table 9.21Figure 9 shows a standard test configuration for ballistic testing.21 CAST shall provide detail on request for additional test rounds not included in Table 9.
10 m (min)5 m (min)2 m ± 0.1 m
 Protection levels HO3, HO4 and SG1
Protection levels HO1 and HO2

Minimum muzzle-to-target distance for special rounds specified in Table 9
Panel mounted on backing material
Velocity Measuring EquipmentFigure 9: Schematic showing a standard ballistic test configuration6.4. Sample preparation6.4.1. Conditioning panelsAll armour shall be placed in an environment held at a temperature of 20 ± 3°C and 40 to 70% relative humidity for a minimum of 12 hours prior to testing. Protective panels shall be laid flat at all times when conditioning and stacked in piles of no more than four panels.6.4.2. Marking panelsProtective panels shall be marked in accordance with the defined shot pattern for each protection level as specified in Table 10. Two asymmetric shot templates are available for each panel size, which can be inverted to give four potential shot patterns. Each pattern shall be used at least once during a test on a particular armour with the exception of formed panels where a fixed shot pattern shall be used. Where more than four panels are assessed, the shot pattern for the additional panels shall be selected at random. The shot pattern used on each panel shall be recorded and presented in the test report. In circumstances where it would be in contravention of shot placement rules (Table 7) to follow the template, the test facility shall identify another suitable location (e.g. on small panels where the shot template cannot be followed).
Table 10: Shot patterns for marking of armourTypePanel sizeNumber of shotsAngle of shotsShot pattern22UnformedSmall front33 x 0°Drawing ref. M101089/M101090 A, B, C or DSmall rear33 x 0°Medium front76 x 0°1 x 45°Drawing ref. M101093/M101094 A, B, C or DMedium rear76 x 0°1 x 30°Large front76 x 0°1 x 30°Large rear76 x 0°1 x 45°FormedSmall front44 x 0°Formed shot rules (Section 6.6.3.2)Large front44 x 0°Formed shot rules (Section 6.6.3.2) Plate (HO3/4)Front33 x 0°Drawing Ref. M101091/M101092 A, B, C or DRear33 x 0°Plate (SG)Front11 x 0°Centremost position on plateRear11 x 0°Extended CoverageSmall11 x 0°Centremost position on plateLarge11 x 0°* 0° – angle of incidence directly perpendicular to target.Figure 10 illustrates intended usage for the shot patterns. The centre point shall be identified as the intersection of the centrelines of the armour (from the widest sections) in horizontal and vertical directions. This point shall be used as the alignment position for all shot patterns.22 Drawings available on request to CAST.
Figure 10: Illustration of shot pattern intended usageIn addition to the standard shot patterns, a further shot shall be positioned on all medium and large panels submitted for testing at a position 55 ± 5 mm from the edge of the panel, defined by the test facility (i.e. seven shots total shall be conducted on medium and large panels). No additional ‘edge’ shots are mandated for formed armour.6.5. Unformed armour testing6.5.1. Backing material preparationSteel trays measuring 420 ? 350 ? 100 mm (length ? width ? height) (drawing ref. M100866), open on one large face only, shall be filled with Roma Plastilina® No. 1 (Sculpture House, FL, USA) backing material.23 The backing material in each tray shall be manipulated to ensure no air gaps exist. A smooth, flat top surface shall be produced by scraping the material level with the surface plane defined by the edges of the steel tray. The trays shall be marked with the date they were filled with fresh, out of the packet, Roma Plastilina® No. 1 and a unique reference. The contents of the tray shall be disposed of no more than six months after this date.The backing material trays shall be conditioned in a heated enclosure prior to the start of testing. The temperature shall be set so that the response of the backing material meets the calibration requirements outlined in Section 6.5.2.6.5.2. Calibration methodsAfter conditioning of the Roma Plastilina® No. 1, calibration shall be carried out using the equipment and methods specified below:ï Drop test sphere: steel sphere grade ‘100’.ï Sphere diameter: 63.5 ± 0.05 mm.ï Sphere mass: 1,043 ± 5 g.ï Drop height: 2.00 ± 0.02 m.ï Drop spacing: 75 mm minimum from the edge of the tray to the indent centre and 100 mm between indent centres.23 Alternative modelling clays shall not be used.
The calibration drop shall consist of a free fall of the sphere onto the backing material either using a guidance system (e.g. tube of length no greater than 200 mm) or a remote drop mechanism (e.g. electromagnet). A minimum of three drops shall be completed and the arithmetic mean depth of depression shall be 19 ± 2 mm measured from the top edges of the steel tray with no single indentation greater than 22 mm or less than 16 mm. If the backing material response is not within these limits, it should be re-conditioned and re-calibrated prior to use.Any testing using the calibrated backing material shall be conducted within 1 hour of calibration. After this point, the tray shall be re-conditioned in the heated enclosure.6.5.3. Test methods6.5.3.1. Mounting of unformed armourThe Roma Plastilina® No. 1 backing material tray shall be mounted vertically in the test area against a rigid upright support such that the line of flight of the bullet is perpendicular to its front face. A rigid extension support piece shall be mounted around the ballistic tray extending a minimum of 150 mm in each direction (drawing ref. M101273) (Figure 11). The unformed protective panel, outside of its carrier, shall be fastened to the front face of the backing material using two 50 mm wide hook and loop fabric straps. The edge of the straps shall be secured at least 50 mm from any shot location and, if achievable, more than 100 mm from any shot location. The straps shall be secured by hand, such that the panel is secure but not deformed. The body side of the armour panel shall be in contact with the surface of the backing material.Figure 11: Ballistic tray mounted with extension support
6.5.3.2. Test shotsShots shall be performed using the shot patterns specified in Table 10. Following each shot the panel shall be removed from the backing and smoothed24 before replacing it in the same position so that the next shot may be taken. The surface of the Roma Plastilina® No. 1 tray shall also be smoothed without disturbing the BFS of the previous shots. All shots shall be performed before measurements are taken. Bullets trapped in the armour shall not be removed unless impeding the next shot.An angle shot will be the first shot performed on each panel in accordance with the specifications in Table 10. The protective panels, mounted on the Roma Plastilina® No. 1 tray, in succession shall be rotated on the backing material to enable a test to be conducted towards each edge of the armour panel. The setup of this test is shown in Figure 12.Bullet Line of FlightFigure 12: Images showing the rotation of the protective panel and backing material about the shot normal to achieve a 45° angle6.5.3.3. MeasurementsAfter all test shots have been performed, the panel shall be removed from the backing material tray. The BFS resulting from each test shot shall be measured using the top edges of the tray as a reference point with an agreed measurement tool. A measurement shall then be taken at the deepest point of the BFS produced by the shot (Figure 13). This shall be repeated for each shot location.24 Smoothed – pulled flat and straightened without using any significant physical force (e.g. impacting armour against surface to flatten)
Figure 13: Example of a measurement of BFS on flat Roma Plastilina® tray6.5.3.4. AssessmentsAll assessments shall be carried out in accordance with the performance assessment criteria outlined in Section 6.1.1. Perforation shall be assessed from the body side of the armour. BFS values shall be assessed against the limits specified in Table 8.6.5.3.5. Backing material repair and re-conditioningCavities in the Roma Plastilina® No. 1 caused by calibration drop tests or ballistic testing shall be refilled with Roma Plastilina® No. 1 that has been conditioned in the same heated enclosure as the main tray. Any debris remaining in Roma Plastilina® No. 1 following ballistic testing shall be removed before the cavities are refilled. When refilling, the Roma Plastilina® No. 1 shall be pressed firmly into the cavities and smoothed, before the surface of the tray is scraped flat.6.5.4. RecordsThe following information shall be recorded after each shot has been conducted and included in the test report:ï Held or perforated.ï Shot velocity measured at 2 ± 0.1 m from front face of panel at the point of aim, measured in m.s-1 to one decimal place.ï If held:* BFS depth, measured in millimetres to one decimal place;* BFS profile:o Hemispherical;o pencilling – if this occurs, measurements and photographs shall be taken and presented with the test report to CAST.ï Details of any fragmentation/spall (if applicable).After all shots have been conducted, the following information shall be recorded and included in the test report:ï Mean velocity from all shots in test series, recorded in m.s-1 to one decimal place.ï Mean BFS of all shots in test series, recorded in millimetres to one decimal place.ï 
6.6. Formed armour testing6.6.1. Backing material preparationDuring material preparation, the female-shaped torso mould (Appendix D) shall be lined with plastic wrap film. Plastiline® 40 (G.Lalo, Herbin Sueur SA, France) shall be melted in a suitable container in a heated enclosure at 70°C for approximately 10 hours. Plastiline® 40 may separate during the melting process, therefore it shall be stirred at intervals until fully melted.Once melted, the material shall be stirred and then poured into the relevant test mould. On moulding, the mould shall be shaken vigorously by hand for 2 to 3 minutes to remove any porous inclusions before being left to cool for a minimum of 8 hours.The Plastiline® 40 forms shall be conditioned at a minimum temperature of 20°C for a minimum of 3 hours before testing commences. A record shall be kept indicating the date at which the Plastiline® 40 form was first moulded with a unique reference assigned. Plastiline® 40 forms shall be used within 45 days of preparation.6.6.2. Calibration methodsAfter conditioning of Plastiline® 40, calibration shall be carried out using the following equipment and methods.ï Drop test sphere: steel sphere grade ‘100’.ï Sphere diameter: 63.5 ± 0.05 mm.ï Sphere mass: 1043 ± 5 g.ï Drop height: 2.00 ± 0.02 m.ï Drop spacing: 75 mm minimum from the edge of the tray to the indent centre and 100 mm between indent centres.To perform calibration on this shaped backing, the backing material in its mould shall be positioned with the rear face facing upwards in the mould support container (drawing ref. M100879/M100884) (Figure 14). It is recommended that the mould is lined with plastic wrap film during this process to allow ease of removal after calibration. The calibration consists of a free fall drop of the sphere onto the rear of the shaped backing material either using a guidance system (e.g. tube of length no greater than 200 mm) or a remote drop mechanism (e.g. electromagnet). One drop shall be performed on the back of each bust cup (the most built up areas). The arithmetic mean of the two depressions shall be 7 ± 2 mm measured from the top edges of the mould with no single measurement less than 5 mm or greater than 9 mm. If the backing material response is not within these limits, it should be re-conditioned and re- calibrated prior to use.
Figure 14: Shaped torso backing material calibration configurationCavities in the Plastiline® 40 caused by calibration shall be filled with Plastiline® 40 that has been kept in the same heated enclosure as the shaped backing. It shall be pressed firmly into the cavities and smoothed manually before the rear surface of the form is scraped flat. The form may be used immediately following calibration and repair.Any testing using the calibrated backing material shall be conducted within 1 hour of calibration.6.6.3. Test methods6.6.3.1. Mounting of formed armourThe moulded Plastiline® 40 female form shall be mounted vertically in the appropriate bust holders (drawing ref. M100831/M100832) against a rigid, upright support, such that the line of flight of the bullet is perpendicular to the flat rear face of the holder (Figure 15).Figure 15: Plastiline® 40 female busts in wooden bust holdersUnformed armour intended for use by female end-users shall be fitted to the female-shaped backing material and tested in accordance with Section 6.6.3.2.The protective panel, in its carrier, shall be mounted onto the form using its own straps ensuring proper fit over the busts, lining the centremost point of the neck line up with the corresponding position on the form centrally between the busts. Additional strapping may be used where deemed necessary to achieve proper fitting, though care should be taken to ensure the panel is not unnaturally constrained; this shall be noted in the test report provided
to CAST. Note that air gaps are likely to be present between the protective panel and the female form; this is acceptable.6.6.3.2. Test shotsFor each test series on formed armour, a standard shot pattern shall be adopted. The standard shot pattern has four shots at the following locations: the left bust tip, right bust tip, top and bottom (in this shot order). Prior to testing, shot locations shall be marked on the formed armour surface (Figure 16) in accordance with the following procedure:a) Bust tips (most pronounced positions) and the horizontal midpoint between them shall be marked on the Plastiline® 40 bust.b) Top and bottom positions shall be marked at positions 40 ± 5 mm in either direction laterally from the midpoint of the horizontal axis and 10 ± 2 mm vertically in either direction from that point.c) Laser sight from proof barrel shall be placed on the position you intend to mark (e.g. the left bust tip).d) Armour positioned on shaped torso backing material.e) Laser sight position marked on the surface of the armour.f) Procedure repeated for all shot positions.Figure 16: Standard shot pattern locations marked on formed armourCAST reserves the right to identify and assess potential perceived areas of weakness in formed armour design, which may be specified to the test facility on approval of the technical file.All shots shall be performed at an angle such that the line of flight of the bullet is perpendicular to the flat rear face of the wooden bust holders.In a test series, all shots shall be performed before any assessment is undertaken. If there is significant movement of the armour on the shaped backing material between shots, the armour may be re-positioned and re-fastened.
Shot rules detailed in Table 7 are not applicable for formed armour testing as testing is permitted less than 50 mm from the edge of the panel. Velocity requirements specified in Table 8 must be adhered to. If shots are conducted more than 10 mm from the marked shot centre, these shall be considered unfair shots and additional panels shall be tested.6.6.3.3. AssessmentsAll assessments shall be carried out in accordance with the performance assessment criteria outlined in Section 6.1.1. After all shots have been performed, perforation for each test shot shall be assessed from the body side of the armour.The BFS is not assessed in formed armour testing.6.6.3.4. Backing material repair and re-conditioningCavities in the Plastiline® 40 caused by ballistic impact shall be cleared of debris before re- moulding. The backing material shall be re-melted and re-formed following a test series, in accordance with the procedure outlined in Section 6.6.1. Plastiline® 40 may be melted and re- formed a maximum of ten times.6.6.4. RecordsThe following information shall be recorded after each shot has been conducted and included in the test report:ï Held or perforated.ï Shot velocity measured at 2 ± 0.1 m from front face of panel at the point of aim, measured in m.s-1 to one decimal place.ï If held, BFS profile:* hemispherical;* pencilling – if this occurs, measurements and photographs shall be taken and presented with the test report to CAST.ï Details of any fragmentation/spall (if applicable).After all shots have been conducted, the following information shall be recorded and included in the test report:ï Mean velocity from all shots in test series, recorded in m.s-1 to one decimal place.ï 
6.7. Plate testing6.7.1. Backing material preparationRoma Plastilina® No. 1 shall be used to fill the male shaped front and rear torso moulds (Appendix D), ensuring the material is manipulated such that no air gaps exist. A plastic wrap film is recommended as a liner for the mould to promote ease of material release.6.7.2. Calibration methodsPrior to any testing, the Roma Plastilina® No. 1 torso-shaped backing material shall be calibrated in its mould and mould support container (drawing ref. M100889/M100894) in a similar manner to formed armour testing (Section 6.6.2). A plastic wrap film is again recommended as a liner for the mould to promote ease of material release post calibration.Two calibration drops shall be performed on the rear of the test form, with indent centres a minimum distance of 100 mm apart and 75 mm from any edge of the formed torso backing material. Indentations shall have an acceptable arithmetic mean depth of depression of19 ± 2 mm measured from the top edges of the up-turned mould with no single indentation greater than 22 mm or lower than 16 mm. If the backing material response is not within these limits, it shall be re-conditioned and re-calibrated prior to use.Cavities in the Roma Plastilina® No. 1 caused by calibration drop tests shall be refilled with Roma Plastilina® No. 1 that has been conditioned in the same heated enclosure as the main tray. When refilling, the Roma Plastilina® No. 1 shall be pressed firmly into the cavities and smoothed, before the surface of the mould is scraped flat. Any testing using the calibrated backing material shall be conducted within 1 hour of calibration.6.7.3. Test methods6.7.3.1. Mounting of platesTorso backing material shall be mounted centrally onto a tray-formed Roma Plastilina® No. 1 backing material (Figure 17), which has been stored in the same heated conditioning enclosure.Figure 17: Shaped torso backing material test configuration (left: front, right: back)
The Roma Plastilina® No. 1 tray with the shaped male torso form attached shall be mounted vertically in the test area so that the line of flight of the bullet is perpendicular to the flat surface of the rear backing tray. If there are difficulties in adhering the male shaped forms onto the Roma Plastilina® No. 1 trays, additional clay material from the same enclosure may be used around the edges to enable improved adhesion. Ballistic shoulders shall be attached to the edges of the flat Roma Plastilina® No. 1 tray, as shown in Figure 18.The plate shall be placed into a suitable plate carrier system. If it is intended to be used in conjunction with certified soft backing armour then this soft armour shall also be installed into the carrier prior to mounting. The armour carrier shall be positioned over the backing material, using the carrier straps where possible, so that the plate is directly over the moulded surface. Additional strapping may be used where deemed necessary to achieve proper fitting, though care should be taken to ensure the panel is not unnaturally constrained; this shall be noted in the test report provided to CAST.Please note if plates are intended to be worn by female end-users, they shall be tested on the large Plastiline® 40 female-shaped backing to assess for perforation only. In such testing, the backing materials shall be prepared, conditioned and mounted in accordance with the methods outlined in Sections 6.6.1, 6.6.2 and 6.6.3.1. All ballistic testing shall be conducted in accordance with Sections 6.7.3.2 to 6.7.3.4. If there is not an equivalent certified plate of the same construction tested on Roma Plastilina® No.1 male torso-shaped backing, purpose-made plates shall be submitted in accordance with size requirements and submissions quantities outlined in Sections 4.3.1.3 and 4.3.2, respectively, and the test methods outlined in Section 6.7.6.7.3.2. Pre-test measurementsPrior to testing, shot locations shall be marked on the plate surface using the rifle shot patterns (Figure 18). The following procedure shall then be adopted:25a) Plate (and, where applicable, soft armour) positioned on shaped torso backing material.b) Laser sight from firearm barrel positioned on shot location.c) Armour removed and position of laser sight marked on backing material surface.d) Backing material marked at four measurement positions, 10 mm from each shot centre along the orthogonal axes.e) BFS measurement tool zeroed on flat surface of rear Roma Plastilina® No. 1 tray.f) BFS measurement tool used to measure the height above the Roma Plastilina® No. 1 tray surface of each shot centre and the four marked measurement positions (measurements recorded in millimetres (mm), recorded to one decimal place).g) The arithmetic mean of the five marked measurement locations about each shot location shall be calculated.25 Alternative BFS measurement techniques may be used with prior permissions from CAST.
		Figure 18: Marking of shot locations and measurement of pre-shot surface positions6.7.3.3. Test shotsShots conducted in accordance with HO3 and HO4 ballistic protection levels shall be performed in the positions specified on the rifle shot pattern. For testing to the SG1 protection level, a single shot shall be conducted in the centre of the plate.All shots shall be performed at an angle such that the line of flight of the bullet is perpendicular to the flat Roma Plastilina® No. 1 tray backing.6.7.3.4. Post-test measurementsAfter each test shot has been conducted, the rifle plate shall be removed and measurements shall be taken at the marked positions using parts (e) to (f) of the procedure described in Section 6.7.3.2. The armour shall then be re-positioned on the backing material with subsequent shots marked in accordance with parts (b) to (d) of Section 6.7.3.2.The BFS values from each shot location shall be calculated as the difference between the pre- and post-test arithmetic means determined from raw unrounded data from measurements made on the shaped torso backing.6.7.3.5. AssessmentsAll assessments shall be carried out in accordance with the performance assessment criteria outlined in Section 6.6.1. Perforation shall be assessed from the body side of the armour. BFS values shall be assessed against the limits specified in Table 8.6.7.3.6. Backing material repair and re-conditioningFollowing testing, the shaped Roma Plastilina® No. 1 torso backing materials shall be placed back into the original mould nested in the support container with the front face covered in plastic wrap film. Any cavities in the backing material shall then be back-filled with Roma Plastilina® No. 1 material that has been conditioned in the same enclosure as the tray; this shall be compressed into the mould and re-conditioned.
6.7.4. RecordsThe following information shall be recorded after each shot has been conducted and included in the test report:ï Held or perforated.ï Shot velocity measured at 2 ± 0.1 m from front face of panel at the point of aim, measured in m.s-1 to one decimal place.ï If held:* position data from each measurement location, measured in millimetres to one decimal place;* mean BFS of each shot, recorded in millimetres to one decimal place;* BFS profile:o hemispherical;o pencilling – if this occurs, measurements and photographs shall be taken and presented with the test report to the CAST.ï Details of any fragmentation/spall (if applicable).After all shots have been conducted, the following information shall be recorded and included in the test report:ï Mean velocity from all shots in test series, recorded in m.s-1 to one decimal place.ï Mean BFS of all shots in test series, recorded in millimetres to one decimal place.6.8. Critical perforation analysis6.8.1. IntroductionCPA shall be performed on HO1 and HO2 unformed armour following certification testing where the armour has met the minimum acceptable criteria at the given protection levels. The tests aim to identify the velocity associated to a given statistical probability of body armour perforation. Such values shall be used to inform the performance of the certified armour and as a metric for comparison in PQT (Section 10) and ILM (Section 11).6.8.2. Test configurationCPA testing shall be conducted using a rigid frame structure with the protective panels mounted onto a 400 ? 400 ? 100 mm piece of Plastazote® LD29 foam block backed by a flat vertical surface (e.g. 10 mm thick piece of plywood). The foam shall be conditioned in an environment maintained at 20 ± 3°C and relative humidity range of 40 to 70% for a minimum of 12 hours before testing commences. A new sheet of foam shall be installed at the start of the CPA test for an armour model and after it becomes significantly damaged such that further shots on undisturbed regions are no longer possible.Figure 19 illustrates a test rig that could be used for such tests (drawing ref. M100823).
Figure 19: Example of a CPA test rig6.8.3. Test methodsFor all CPA tests, the MEN 9 mm FMJ DM11A1B2 shall be used, as specified in Table 8. Tests shall be conducted at a range of velocities into a minimum of three large protective panels with shot centres marked off the orthogonal axes of any other shot according to shot placement rules (Table 7). Between six and ten shots shall be performed on each panel; this shall be defined by the manufacturer. The panels shall be mounted in accordance with mounting instructions specified in Section 6.5.3.1.A minimum of 30 shots shall be performed with the test end conditions governed by the point at which the standard deviation of the V50 is below 10% of the mean. This condition shall be indicated by the CPA software.6.8.4. Software and test instructionsCPA software, DOSG Perforation Tool 26 shall be installed according to the developer’s guidelines. Recommended usage for the software has been outlined below.a) Enter contextual information for the test (i.e. agency, target, ammunition, date and range).b) Select the protection level the armour has been tested to. This will update provide the software with the confidence limits detailed in Table 11.Table 11: CPA confidence limitsProtection levelLower Confidence Limit (m.s-1)Upper Confidence Limit (m.s-1)HO1300600HO235065026 To be provided by CAST on request.
c) Based on the suggestions given by the software, adjust powder mass to attain specified velocity.d) Conduct the ballistic shot in the marked location.e) Measure the velocity and record in the software.f) Check to see whether the armour has perforated and record this information into the software (0 = non-perforation; 1 = perforation; 2 = ignore record.27)g) Further velocity suggestions will be made by the software based on the outcome of each shot, repeat steps (c) to (f) for future shots until end condition met.6.8.5. AssessmentsPass criteria for V01 are values of 375 m.s-1 and 440 m.s-1 for HO1 and HO2 protection levels, respectively.V50 values are, at this stage, not involved in assessments but shall be used for comparative purposes in subsequent PQT (and ILM) evaluations.6.8.6. RecordsOn completion of a CPA test, V01 and V50 values given by the software shall be recorded. The data sheet containing submitted information shall be saved using the following naming convention:CPA – [Manufacturer] – [Armour Model] – [Test Facility Name] – [Protection Level] – [Date]This file shall be submitted to CAST alongside the certification test report.6.9. Additional ballistic testsAdditional shots may be performed at perceived points of weakness on the protective panels. The test facility is authorised to identify potential points of weakness for testing purposes on CAST’s approval. CAST may also instruct the test facility to conduct tests on specific locations of the panel, which will be determined on review of the technical file.27 To be used in instances where there is an unfair shot (based on distance only) or insufficient data has been recorded (e.g. velocity not measured).
6.10. Extended coverage6.10.1. Test configuration6.10.1.1. Soft armour panelsExtended coverage panels of a soft armour construction shall be assessed on a flat Roma Plastilina® No. 1 tray prepared, conditioned and calibrated in the same manner as unformed armour outlined in Sections 6.5.1 and 6.5.2.Soft extended coverage panels shall be mounted using two 50 mm wide hook and loop fabric straps adjusted by hand such that the panel is secure but not deformed and the body side of the protective panel is in contact with the surface of the backing material.6.10.1.2. Hard armour panelsExtended coverage panels of a hard armour construction (plates) shall be mounted on a flat Roma Plastilina® No. 1 tray prepared, conditioned and calibrated in the same manner as unformed armour outlined in Sections 6.5.1 and 6.5.2 and back-filled with conditioned Roma Plastilina® No. 1 material into the armour cavities.Hard extended coverage panels shall be mounted using two 50 mm wide hook and loop fabric straps adjusted by hand such that the panel is secure but not deformed and the body side of the protective panel is in contact with the surface of the backing material.6.10.2. Shot markingThe centremost point on the panel shall be marked as the shot centre based on the intersections of the centrelines of the armour (from the widest sections) in horizontal and vertical directions, as shown in Figure 20. In some instances, these locations may not comply with the shot placement rules outlined in Section 6.1.4; this is acceptable.Figure 20: Example shot marking on extended coverage panelsOn panels where there is a tapering in geometry equating to a change in width greater than 50% of the panels widest point, the manufacturer must either stipulate an area of full protection or subject the panel to testing on the tapered region as well as the main body. In these instances, the performance of the panel will be considered as a whole. This is illustrated in Figure 21.
		Figure 21: Example of shot marking on tapered extended coverage panels6.10.3. Test methodsExtended coverage panels shall be tested using the ammunition detailed in Table 8 for each protection level. Two shots shall be conducted per ammunition type; one on small and one on large panels.All shots shall be performed in an orientation such that the line of flight of the bullet is perpendicular to the flat front face of the Roma Plastilina® No. 1 backing material.6.10.4. AssessmentsAll assessments shall be carried out in accordance with the performance assessment criteria outlined in Section 6.1.1. After each shot has been performed, perforation shall be assessed from the body side of the armour.BFS is not assessed in extended coverage panels.6.10.5. RecordsThe following information shall be recorded after each shot has been conducted and included in the test report:ï Held or perforated.ï Shot velocity measured at 2 ± 0.1 m from front face of panel at the point of aim, measured in m.s-1 to one decimal place.ï If held, BFS profile:* hemispherical;* pencilling – if this occurs, measurements and photographs shall be taken and presented with the test report to CAST.ï Details of any fragmentation/spall (if applicable).ï 
After all shots have been conducted, the following information shall be recorded and included in the test report:ï Mean velocity from all shots in test series, recorded in m.s-1 to one decimal place.6.11. ReportingReporting of all ballistic tests shall follow the template provided by CAST.28 This completed report shall be sent to CAST alongside any associated relevant information (e.g. photographs) on completion of tests.All test reports will be protectively marked as ‘OFFICIAL SENSITIVE [COMMERICAL]’ with handling instructions ‘for use by the Home Office, stated manufacturer and stated test facility only, unless otherwise agreed by all parties’ and kept on record for a minimum of five years.28 To be issued to test facilities in a separate file.
7. Stab testing7.1. General stab testing requirements7.1.1. Performance assessment criteriaAll stab resistant armour, regardless of protection level, shall not exceed the penetration limits defined in Table 13 for the associated protection level being assessed.7.1.2. Fair strikeA fair strike shall be recorded if:ï the energy of the stab falls within the defined tolerance in Table 14;ï the stab placement rules, defined in Table 12, are adhered to;ï unless otherwise specified, the stab is perpendicular to the target.Any strike that does not meet the fair strike criteria will be classed as unfair and repeated unless covered by exceptions in Section 7.1.3.7.1.3. ExceptionsThe following conditions represent exceptions to the fair strike criteria for stab testing:ï If the stab energy is below the specified range but the depth of penetration limits are exceeded; this shall be classed as a fair strike.ï If the stab energy is above the specified range and the depths of penetration requirements are met; this may be classed as a fair strike upon acceptance by the manufacturer. Beyond this point, any subsequent fair strikes are considered acceptable.ï If the stab placement rules are not adhered to and the depth of penetration requirements are met; this may be classed as a fair strike upon acceptance by the manufacturer. Beyond this point, any subsequent fair strikes are considered acceptable.If the manufacturer considers an unfair strike, which they have not accepted, to have compromised the continued performance of the panel under test they may request that a full re-test of that panel is completed. In these circumstances, the manufacturer shall provide an additional panel to the test facility for testing.
7.1.4. Strike placement rulesStrikes shall be positioned according to strike rules outlined in Table 12.Table 12: Stab strike placement rulesPanel typeMin. strike-to-strike distanceMin. strike-to-edge distance29Unformed50 mm50 mmFormedn/an/aExtended coveragen/an/a7.2. Protection levelsThere are two knife protection levels, each of which can be upgraded to include spike protection. For each knife protection level, two stab energies are assessed, E1 and E2. Spike is only assessed at E1. The test energies and associated permissible depths of penetration are shown in Table 13. For each knife protection level there is a single penetration limit (SPL), which defines a maximum permissible penetration for a single stab in a test series.Table 13: Stab protection levelsProtection levelEnergy level E1Energy level E2Energy (J) Maximum penetration at E1 (mm)SPL at E1(mm)Energy (J) Maximum penetration at E2 (mm)SPL at E2(mm)KR124.08.09.036.020.030.0KR1 + SP124.0KR1 = 8.0,SP1 = 0KR1 = 9.0,SP1 = 036.0KR1 = 20.0, SP1 = N/AKR1 = 20.0, SP1 = N/AKR233.08.09.050.020.030.0KR2 + SP233.0KR2 = 8.0,SP2 = 0KR1 = 9.0,SP2 = 050.0KR2 = 20.0, SP2 = N/AKR2 = 30.0, SP2 = N/AAt energy E1, one penetration in a test series is permitted up to 9.0 mm. All other penetrations must be 8.0 mm or below. These values are absolute and no rounding is permitted.At energy E2, one penetration in a test series is permitted up to 30.0 mm. All other penetrations must be 20.0 mm or below. As with E1 these values are absolute and no rounding is permitted.Spike is only assessed at energy E1. No penetrations are permitted.29 Distances specified from the edge of the cut to the edge of the armour and/or the edge of the backing material.
7.3. Energy requirementsThe stab energy shall be calculated from the recorded velocity and mass of the sabot/blade assembly using Equation (1) and reported in joules to one decimal place.1?? =	????22(1)Where E = energy in joules, m = mass in kg and v = velocity in m.s-1.The energy of each stab shall be within the defined tolerance shown in Table 14. The minimum and maximum values shown are absolute, no rounding up (to minimum) or down (to maximum) is permitted.Table 14: Stab energy permitted tolerancesEnergy levelSpecified energy (J)Minimum energy (J)Maximum energy (J)KR1E12423.525.0E23635.337.4KR2E13332.334.3E25049.052.07.4. Environmental test conditionsThe test facility, storage rooms and associated areas shall be maintained at a temperature of 20 ± 3°C and 40 to 70% relative humidity. The working temperature and relative humidity of all areas shall be recorded on the test report.7.5. Test equipment7.5.1. Calibration and recordsThe stab sabot and measurement equipment listed in this section shall be calibrated in accordance with internal quality management systems. All accredited test facilities shall have equipment approved by CAST. Calibration records shall be made available to CAST upon request. Details of equipment used during each test shall be recorded on the test report.
7.5.2. Test configurationFigure 22 illustrates a typical test configuration for stab testing.Stab SabotVelocity Measurement Equipment25 mm ± 2 mmKnife or SpikeBody armour panelStab container box containing composite backing materialAdjustable Test TableFigure 22: Schematic of a typical stab test configuration7.5.3. Guided-mass drop assemblyTests shall be performed using a guided-mass, gravity-driven, drop test assembly. In this assembly, a sabot with a knife or spike end-effector shall be raised to a pre-determined height corresponding with the test energy. The sabot shall then fall, under the influence of gravity, and strike the protective panel at a pre-determined point of impact (see Table 12 for strike placement rules). The guided rails shall prevent the sabot from rotating about its vertical axis during its descent to ensure that the knife strikes in the correct orientation (not applicable for spike).An example of a drop assembly for stab testing is given in drawing ref. M100770.307.5.4. Stab sabotThe stab sabot (drawing ref. M100668)31 shall consist of a knife or spike holder (drawing ref. M100670) of mass 650 ± 6.5 g (including the knife or spike) which shall be housed in a casing of mass 1,250 ± 13 g (combined acceptable mass: 1,900 ± 20.5 g). The knife or spike holder shall be free to move in the vertical axis within the casing, whilst being constrained to restrict rotational movement. The casing shall be designed to ensure minimal friction between the two30 Drawings available on request to CAST.31 Drawings available on request to CAST.
components. The stab sabot shall contain two closed-cell polyethylene foam Plastazote® LD33 discs behind the knife or spike holder, which act as a damper. On insertion of the knife/spike holder into the stab sabot, the discs shall remain under compression with their total thickness reduced by 5 ± 0.5 mm. The knife or spike shall be securely held within the holder to limit movement during tests.The overall stab sabot length shall be sufficient to ensure that at least 50% of it remains inside the guided drop test assembly throughout a test.An example of a stab sabot for testing to this standard is given in Figure 23.Sabot casingDamper discsKnife/spike holderKnifeFigure 23: Section view through stab sabot7.5.5. KnifeThe test blade shall be sourced from a Home Office approved supplier (Appendix D). It shall be manufactured in accordance with drawing reference M100598 and batch certified in accordance with the Cutlery and Allied Trades Research Association (CATRA) procedure HO/K with a value of ≤ 3.47 N.Prior to use, each knife shall be wiped clean with an alcohol based degreasing wipe or similar taking care not to damage the tip. A knife shall be used only once; following each stab it shall be replaced.7.5.6. SpikeThe test spike shall be sourced from a Home Office approved supplier (Appendix D). It shall be manufactured in accordance with drawing reference M100634 and batch certified in accordance with the CATRA procedure HO/S with a value of ≤ 4.5 N.Prior to use, each spike shall be wiped clean with an alcohol based degreasing wipe or similar. A spike shall be used only once; following each stab it shall be replaced.
7.5.7. Stab dampersThe dampers shall be cut from a sheet of closed-cell polyethylene foam Plastazote® LD33 that has been stored flat for a minimum of 24 hours prior to use. The dampers shall be cut to leave a smooth, parallel edge.The dampers, individually, when cut shall have the following specification:ï Diameter: 50 ± 0.5 mmï Thickness per damper: 30 ± 1 mmEach set of two dampers used within the stab sabot shall have a collective thickness of60 ± 1 mm. These dampers shall be used for a maximum of five stabs prior to replacement.7.5.8. Test tableThe test table is a rigid component in the stab test assembly supporting the stab backing materials; it shall be positioned on a flat, rigid surface. The test table shall be adjustable to enable the protective panel to be raised or lowered to ensure that it is positioned in accordance with the test requirements. An example of such a test table is shown in Figure 24.Figure 24: Example of adjustable table for stab testing7.5.9. Stab backing containerStab backing materials shall be placed into a rigid surround such as the container in Figure 25. The top layer of the backing material shall be level with the surround to form a continuous surface that extends a minimum of 60 mm in each direction.
Figure 25: Stab backing material container7.5.10. Velocity measurementAll velocities shall be recorded when the tip of the knife or spike is 25 ± 2 mm from the surface of the armour. The velocity of each strike shall be recorded in metres per second (m.s-1), reported to two decimal places.It is recommended that a light gate system is adopted with a minimum sample rate of 30 kHz and a base length of 50 ± 2 mm. Alternative systems may be used, however, details of the system must be submitted to CAST and approved as an appropriate method prior to use.7.5.11. Depth of penetration measurementTo measure the depth of penetration of the knife into the armour following a strike, a calibrated rule and a digital microscope are required.The rule shall be accurate to 1 mm, whilst the microscope shall possess a minimum zoom of 20? and a minimum resolution of 1,024 ? 1,024 pixels; it shall permit measurements to an accuracy of 0.01 mm.7.6. Sample preparation7.6.1. Conditioning panelsAll armour shall be placed in an environment held at a temperature of 20 ± 3°C and 40 to 70% relative humidity for a minimum of 12 hours prior to testing. Protective panels shall be laid flat at all times when conditioning and stacked in piles of no more than four panels.7.6.2. Marking panels7.6.2.1. Unformed armourStrikes shall be performed on unformed protective panels in accordance with the strike rules defined in Section 7.1.4 on panel sizes shown in Table 15. For unformed armour, strikes on each specified size shall be performed on a single panel, unless this is in contravention of strike placement rules in which case an additional panel may be used.
Table 15: Unformed armour stab test quantitiesPanel sizeNo. of panelsEnergy levelNo. of strikesKnifeSpikeKnifeSpikeSmall11*E155E22 (45°, 90°)n/aMedium1E110n/aE22 (45°, 60°, 90°)n/aLarge11*E11510E25n/a* If necessary, where applicable spike tests may be conducted on the same panels used in knife testing adhering with strike placement rules defined in Table 12.Each knife strike shall be conducted in a different orientation. Unless otherwise specified in Table 15, these orientations shall be at 0°, 30°, 45°, 60° and 90° aligned to the long axis of the protective panel (Figure 26). The protective panel shall be rotated to achieve these orientations.Figure 26: Image showing intended orientation of knife strikes on a protective panelPrior to conducting any stab testing, all stab locations shall be marked onto the panel. A central stab region shall be drawn by first identifying the centremost point on the panel, defined by the intersection of the centrelines of panel (from the widest point) in vertical and horizontal directions. A box extending 25% of the overall height of the panel in each direction shall be drawn from this centre point (Figure 27). Proportionally, 80% of strikes shall be conducted in the centre of the protective panel. The remaining strikes shall be conducted outside of this area in accordance with strike placement rules (Table 12).
Overall HeightOverall WidthFigure 27: Knife strike placement on unformed protective panelsOn medium and large unformed armour panels, at least one E1 energy level strike shall be performed at a location 55 ± 5 mm from the edge of the panel, defined by the test facility.7.6.2.2. Formed armourFor formed armour testing, separate panels are required for knife and spike testing on each size due to the prescribed locations of the strikes being performed. Table 16 shows the quantities of knife and spike strikes required on each size of armour for each protection type (i.e. two small and two large formed armour panels would be required for knife and spike protection).Table 16: Formed armour stab test quantitiesPanel sizeNo. of panelsEnergy levelNo. of strikesSmall1E14Large1E14The protective panel shall be marked in accordance with the positions specified in Section6.6.3.2. Knife strikes shall be conducted at orientations 0°, 30°, 45° and 90° aligned to the long axis of the protective panel; applied at the discretion of the test facility.Four strikes shall be performed (in this strike order) at positions: left bust tip, right bust tip, top and bottom.CAST reserves the right to identify and assess potential areas of weakness for testing specified to the test facility on approval of the technical file.The same strike locations shall be followed on additional panels for spike testing.
7.6.2.3. Extended coverageFor extended coverage panels, separate panels are required for knife and spike testing on each size due to the prescribed locations of the stabs being performed. Table 17 shows the quantities of knife and spike strikes required on different sizes of armour. A single strike shall be positioned in the centre of the panel. All strikes shall be aligned at a 0° angle with the long axis of the panel.Table 17: Extended coverage panel stab test quantitiesPanel sizeNo. of panelsEnergy levelNo. of strikesKnifeSpikeKnifeSpikeSmall11E111Large11E1117.7. Unformed armour testing7.7.1. Backing materialsA composite pack of backing materials described below shall be positioned beneath protective panels in stab testing on unformed armour. This backing material pack (Appendix D) shall comprise (from armour strike face downwards):ï 2 x 8 mm sheets of AL52N Expanded Nitrile / NBR Sponge;ï 1 x 8 mm sheet of DK1735 Expanded Firm Neoprene Sponge Rubber;ï 1 x 30 mm sheet of LD24 Plastazote® closed-cell polyethylene foam;ï 2 x 6 mm sheets of AL55 solid natural rubber.All materials in this pack have dimensions of 400 ? 333 mm (length ? width). The materials shall be configured in the same order as in Figure 28.2 x 8 mm AL52N1 x 8 mm DK17351 x 30 mm LD242 x 6mm AL55Figure 28: Composite stab backing material pack
All backing materials shall be placed in an environment held at a temperature of 20 ± 3°C and 40 to 70% relative humidity for a minimum of 12 hours prior to testing.All of the composite stab backing materials, excepting the solid natural rubber, shall be replaced after all tests have been conducted for a single certification test or when the foam becomes visibly damaged.The backing materials shall be placed into the stab backing container (Figure 25) for both calibration and stab testing.7.7.2. Calibration methodsPrior to testing, calibration shall be performed on the composite pack of stab backing materials using the methods and equipment specified below:ï Drop test sphere: steel sphere grade ‘100’.ï Sphere diameter: 0.5 ± 0.05 mm.ï Sphere mass: 1,043 ± 5 g.ï Drop height: 1.50 ± 0.02 m.ï Drop spacing: 75 mm minimum from any edge to indent centre and 100 mm between indent centres.The calibration drop shall consist of a free fall release of the sphere onto the backing material, positioned on a flat, rigid, surface, either using a guidance system (e.g. tube of length no greater than 150 mm) or a remote drop mechanism (e.g. electromagnet). Three drops shall be completed and the rebound height shall be 425 ± 75 mm, measured from the top surface of the backing material pack to the bottom of the sphere.A minimum of 10 minutes shall be left post calibration to allow for material recovery prior to testing.7.7.3. Test methods7.7.3.1. Mounting of unformed armourThe armour shall be secured using two 50 mm wide hook and loop fabric straps adjusted by hand such that the panel is restrained but not deformed and the body side of the protective panel is in contact with the surface of the backing material. The straps, where possible, shall be at least 100 mm from the strike location and, in no circumstances, less than 50 mm.It shall be possible to rotate and move the backing material under the guided drop assembly to allow the armour to be tested in different locations and orientations.7.7.3.2. Test strikesTest strikes shall be conducted in accordance with the energy levels specified in Table 13 and strike placement rules in Table 12. The stab sabot shall be raised to a defined height to achieve the required energy of impact; it shall then be released and fall under the influence of gravity onto the protective panel.When the stab is completed, the knife or spike shall be removed from the sabot carefully so that any penetration of the knife or spike may be measured from the body side of the protective panels. Depth of penetration shall be assessed before the panel is re-positioned on the
backing material. The new strike shall be positioned a minimum of 50 mm from the closest edge of the previous cut location on the backing material.Each strike shall be performed with a new knife or spike; sabot dampers shall be replaced after a maximum of five stabs. A minimum of 5 minutes shall be left between each strike to allow for materials to recover. The time of each strike shall be recorded. At the start of a test series, the dampers shall be replaced.7.7.4. Measurements7.7.4.1. KnifeIf the knife is visible on the body side of the protective panel, a calibrated rule shall be used initially to provide an indicative measure of the visible length of the knife as shown in Figure29. Note, the knife shall not be moved or manipulated prior to measurement.Figure 29: Calibrated rule knife depth of penetration measurementFollowing such measurement:ï If the depth of penetration, measured by rule, is above 12 mm for E1 strikes or above 33 mm for E2 strikes, no further measurements are required.ï If the depth of penetration is 12 mm or below for E1 strikes or 33 mm or below for E2 strikes, the cut length shall be measured using cut length techniques outlined below.The knife shall be carefully removed vertically from the protective panel so that the cut length on the body side of the panel is not disturbed.After all stabs have been performed, the body side of the armour cover shall be cut and removed from the rest of the protective panel such that the inside surface of this cover is visible. The cut lengths shall then be measured on the inside of the cover using a calibrated digital microscope. The microscope shall be focussed over the cut and an image shall be taken. If there is insufficient contrast in the image to clearly identify the length of the cut, a chalk spray may be used directly over the cut area prior to taking the image. Appropriate image processing software shall be used to digitally measure the cut length. Cut lengths shall be measured in millimetres to two decimal places. The procedure for measurement of cut length is illustrated in Figure 30. Care should be taken to ensure any areas of tearing are not included in the measurement.
Figure 30: Cut length measurement determining depth of penetrationThe cut length shall be converted to depth of penetration using Equation (2).????????? ???? ?????????????????????? (????) = ?????? ??????????? (????) ? 2.396(2)7.7.4.2. SpikeMeasurement of penetration depth is not required following a spike test. The protective panel shall be examined solely for evidence of perforation. This shall be determined if:ï the spike is visible on the body side of the panel, or,ï there is evidence that the body side of the panel has been pierced by the spike.7.7.5. AssessmentsDepth of penetration measurements from each knife and spike strike shall be assessed against the acceptable limits specified in Table 13.7.7.6. RecordsThe following information shall be recorded after each strike has been conducted and included in the test report:ï Time at which strike performed.ï Velocity measured 25 ± 2 mm from the surface, measured in m.s-1 to one decimal place.ï Energy, measured in joules to one decimal place.ï Ruler measurement for depth of knife penetration (where over specified limits), measured in millimetres to one decimal place.ï Any spike perforation (if applicable).ï 
After all strikes have been conducted, the following information shall be recorded and included in the test report:ï Cut length of each knife strike (where below specified limits), measured using digital microscope in millimetres to two decimal places.32ï Depth of knife penetration, recorded in millimetres to two decimal places.ï Mean velocity from all strikes in test series, recorded in m.s-1 to one decimal place.ï Mean energy from all strikes in test series, recorded in joules to one decimal place.7.8. Formed armour testing7.8.1. Backing materialsAll formed protective panels shall be assessed using Plastiline® 40 shaped backing materials prepared, conditioned and calibrated in accordance with methods outlined in Sections 6.6.1 and 6.6.2.7.8.2. Test methods7.8.2.1. Mounting of formed armourThe moulded, conditioned and calibrated Plastiline® 40 female form shall be mounted in the wooden bust holders (drawing ref. M100831/M100832). A standard strike pattern shall be adopted following the same positioning instructions as Section 6.6.3.2.Flat regions shall be induced in the areas directly beneath each of the strike locations to prevent ‘drag cuts’. These regions shall be 20 mm in diameter and shall be produced by depressing the local region under the strike location with a flat rigid object.The panel, in its test carrier, shall be mounted onto the conditioned shaped torso backing using its own straps, lining the centremost point of the neck line up with the corresponding position on the form centrally between the busts. Additional straps may be used if considered necessary; this shall be included in the test report. Note that air gaps are likely to be present between the protective panel and the backing material; this is acceptable.The assembly shall then be laid horizontally on the test table as shown in Figure 31.32 A digital image of each cut length, taken using the microscope, shall be stored on record.
Figure 31: Formed armour stab test configuration7.8.2.2. Test strikesTest strikes shall be conducted in accordance with the energy levels in Table 13.Each strike shall be performed with a new knife or spike; stab sabot dampers shall be replaced after a maximum of five stabs. A minimum of 5 minutes shall be left between each stab to allow for materials to recover. At the start of a test series on a new construction, the dampers shall be replaced.Strike rules detailed in Table 12 are not applicable for formed armour testing as testing is permitted less than 50 mm from the edge of the panel. Energy requirements specified in Table 14 must be adhered to.7.8.2.3. MeasurementsMeasurements for knife and spike strikes shall be conducted directly on the Plastiline® 40 shaped torso backing materials using the microscope method outlined in Section 7.7.4.1.7.8.3. AssessmentsDepth of penetration measurements from each knife and spike strike shall be assessed against the limits outlined in Table 13.7.8.4. RecordsThe following information shall be recorded after each strike has been conducted and included in the test report:ï Time at which strike performed.ï Velocity measured 25 ± 2 mm from the surface, measured in m.s-1 to two decimal places.ï Energy, measured in joules to one decimal place.ï Any spike perforation (if applicable).ï 
After all strikes have been conducted, the following information shall be recorded and included in the test report:ï Cut length of each knife strike (where below specified limits), measured using digital microscope in millimetres to two decimal places.33ï Depth of knife penetration, recorded in millimetres to two decimal places.ï Mean velocity from all strikes in test series, recorded in m.s-1 to one decimal place.ï Mean energy from all strikes in test series, recorded in joules to one decimal place.7.9. Additional stab testsAdditional test strikes may be performed at perceived points of weakness on the protective panels. The test facility is authorised to identify potential points of weakness for testing purposes on CAST’s authorisation. CAST may also instruct the test facility to conduct tests on specific locations of the panel, which will be determined on review of the technical file.7.10. Extended coverage panels7.10.1. Test configurationExtended coverage panels shall be mounted onto a conditioned, calibrated composite stab backing material pack for unformed armour in the same manner as outlined in Section 7.7.7.10.2. Marking of panelsA large and a small panel shall be provided tested for each protection type (e.g. two large and two small panels would be required for KR1+SP1 extended coverage panels).Panels shall be marked in the same positions as outlined for ballistic testing (Section 6.10.2). All strikes shall be aligned at a 0° angle with the long axis of the panel (Figure 26).As described in Section 6.10.2, on panels where there is a tapering or change in width greater than 50% in the largest section (e.g. shoulder), additional strikes shall be taken. Should the manufacturer decide not to test the performance of this tapered zone, an area of full protection, defined by the manufacturer, shall be clearly marked on the product and be visible to the wearer (Figure 21).7.10.3. Test methodsUnless otherwise specified, a single strike shall be conducted on the centre of the panel at the E1 energy level. Tests and associated measurements shall be conducted in accordance with methods outlined for stab testing of unformed armour in Section 7.7.7.10.4. AssessmentsDepth of penetration measurements from each knife and spike strike shall be assessed against the limits outlined in Table 13.33 A digital image of each cut length, taken using the microscope, shall be stored on record.
7.10.5. RecordsThe following information shall be recorded after each strike has been conducted and included in the test report:ï Time at which strike performed.ï Velocity measured 25 ± 2 mm from the surface, measured in m.s-1 to one decimal place.ï Energy, measured in joules to one decimal place.ï Ruler measurement for depth of knife penetration (where over specified limits), measured in millimetres to one decimal place.ï Any spike perforation (if applicable).After all strikes have been conducted, the following information shall be recorded and included in the test report:ï Cut length of each knife strike (where below specified limits), measured using digital microscope in millimetres to two decimal places.34ï Depth of knife penetration, recorded in millimetres to two decimal places.ï Mean velocity from all strikes in test series, recorded in m.s-1 to one decimal place.ï Mean energy from all strikes in test series, recorded in joules to one decimal place.7.11. ReportingReporting of stab tests shall follow the template provided by CAST.35 This completed report shall be sent to CAST alongside any associated relevant information (e.g. photographs) on completion of tests.All test reports will be protectively marked as ‘OFFICIAL SENSITIVE [COMMERICAL]’ with handling instructions ‘for use by the Home Office, stated manufacturer and stated test facility only, unless otherwise agreed by all parties’ and kept on record for a minimum of five years.34 A digital image of each cut length, taken using the microscope, shall be stored on record.35 To be issued to test facilities in a separate file, as required.
8. Construction assessments8.1. General requirementsOn completion of the ballistic and/or stab testing, all submitted protective panels shall be assessed by the test facility to ensure the construction is the same as declared in the redacted technical file (Section 3.6.3).Any discrepancies shall be recorded and reported to CAST and the manufacturer. Should these discrepancies be deemed significant by CAST, the protective panels shall be sent to CAST for checks.Following construction assessments, the test facility shall store the panels for a period of six months post certification at which point they shall be returned to the manufacturer.CAST reserves the right to request any sample from the test facility for audit checks.8.2. Construction assessmentsFollowing testing, each protective panel shall be removed from its cover and, where possible, physically separated to expose the individual material layers.36 At this stage, the construction methods and, where applicable, stitching patterns detailed in the technical file shall be assessed. Subsequently, the materials and layer constructions shall be assessed against those specified in the technical file.Any irregularities in construction shall be photographed and reported to CAST.8.3. ReportingDetails from the construction assessments shall be recorded in the template provided by CAST37 along with any associated relevant information (e.g. photographs). This spreadsheet shall be submitted with test reports on completion of testing.All test reports will be protectively marked as ‘OFFICIAL SENSITIVE [COMMERICAL]’ with handling instructions ‘for use by the Home Office, stated manufacturer and stated test facility only, unless otherwise agreed by all parties’ and kept on record for a minimum of five years.36 In instances where an adhesive has been used and it is not possible to separate the layers, a visual assessment of construction shall be conducted.37 Available on request to CAST.
9. Additional assessments9.1. General requirementsAll additional assessments are optional; they may only be performed on certified armours. Testing shall be conducted in accordance with PQT submission requirements, test methods and assessment criteria (Section 10). All testing must be conducted at a CAST accredited independent test facility (Appendix C).9.2. Pre-conditioning9.2.1. Wet testingThe cover of a body armour protective panel submitted for wet testing shall be cut on the body side from the centre neck line to the base. The armour shall then be submerged vertically in de-ionised water at 15 to 20°C for a period of 15 ± 3 min. The specimen shall then be removed and hung vertically with minimal support for 5 minutes in an area complying with the conditions in Section 6.4.1 prior to testing. The first shot shall be conducted within 5 minutes of the end of the drying period and the final shot no more than 45 minutes later.9.2.2. Extreme temperature testingProtective panels submitted for extreme temperature testing shall be pre-conditioned in an environmental chamber for 24 ± 2 hours at either:ï 50 ± 5°Cï -20 ± 2°CFollowing pre-conditioning, the protective panels shall be removed from the environmental chamber and hung in an environment complying with the conditions specified in Section 6.4.1 for 30 ± 5 minutes prior to testing. The first shot shall be conducted within 5 minutes of the end of the conditioning period and the final shot no more than 45 minutes later.9.3. ReportingOn completion of testing, the reports shall be sent to CAST for review alongside any associated relevant information (e.g. photographs) on completion of tests.All test reports will be protectively marked as ‘OFFICIAL SENSITIVE [COMMERICAL]’ with handling instructions ‘for use by the Home Office, stated manufacturer and stated test facility only, unless otherwise agreed by all parties’ and kept on record for a minimum of five years.
10. Production quality testing10.1. General requirementsPQT is a quality assurance tool designed to periodically assess the performance of certified in- production body armour and ensure it remains at its certified level. This process outlines the formal quality testing which shall be conducted at one of the CAST accredited test facilities (Appendix C).CAST PQT checks are an independent check of a product only. It is the responsibility of the manufacturer to ensure that all armour produced performs as intended through an adequate quality assurance procedure. This must be detailed in the technical file during certification. CAST may request internal quality assurance records for a given armour model at any time.PQT shall be performed on all certified armour at intervals outlined in Section 10.2.Once the specified production milestones have been reached, PQT shall be submitted for assessment within a maximum time period of four weeks. All samples submitted for PQT must be taken directly from a production run.Following PQT, test results shall be supplied to CAST for assessment and approval. CAST reserve the right to request an investigation (Section 10.9) and/or remove certification at any time if the manufacturer fails to comply with PQT or if a product fails PQT.10.2. Frequency of assessmentInitial PQT assessments of any certified armour (plate, soft armour or extended coverage panel) shall be conducted in the first post-certification production run. This shall be performed at one of the CAST accredited independent test facilities.On successful completion, the certified armour shall undergo re-assessment after two years have elapsed, effective from the date of the previous set of successful PQT tests.10.3. PQT submission requirements10.3.1. Quantities of armour requiredThe minimum submission requirements for PQT are outlined in Table 18 and Table 19. All armour shall be submitted in accordance with sizes in Section 4.3.1.
Table 18: Quantities of armour required for ballistic PQTProtection levelPanel typeSizeCPA(minimum quantity – large panels)SmallMediumLargeFBFBFBHO1 or HO2Unformed3Formed22HO3Plate38,3911HO4Plate21SG1Plate11Extended coverage11F = front panel; B = back panel; dark grey boxes – no panels required.Table 19: Quantities of armour required for knife/spike PQTProtection levelPanel typeSize (all front)SmallMediumLargeKR1 or KR2Unformed11Formed11KR1 + SP1 or KR2 + SP2Unformed11Formed11Extended Coverage1110.3.2. Unformed armourA minimum of three large panels are required for ballistic testing with two panels required for stab testing in accordance with the methods outlined in Section 10.5.1 and 10.6.1 respectively.10.3.3. Formed armourFor formed armour, two small and two large front panels shall be submitted for ballistic testing in accordance with Section 10.5.2. For stab testing, one large and one small panel shall be submitted for testing in accordance with Section 10.6.2.38 Plates shall be supplied with associated soft armour submitted in certification.39 PQT requirements for plates intended for female end-users are given in Section 10.3.4.
Alongside this, if the formed armour has equivalent certified unformed armour of the same construction, this shall be submitted for testing in accordance with Section 10.5.1 and/or Section 10.6.1 for ballistic and stab testing respectively. If this unformed armour has been separately tested for PQT in the previous six months, additional testing is not required.Conversely, if the formed armour does not have equivalent certified unformed armour of the same construction, an associated certified back panel of equivalent construction shall be submitted for PQT in accordance with unformed armour test methods. These unformed panels shall be produced solely for the purpose of PQT CPA assessments.10.3.4. PlatesOne plate, either standalone or in conjunction with certified soft armour backing, shall be submitted for each ammunition type, tested in accordance with the methods outlined in Section 10.5.3.If the plate is intended for female end-users, two large front plates (with certified soft armour) shall be tested on the large female Plastiline® 40 shaped backing following the test methods outlined in Section 10.5.3. Any such plate must have an equivalent certified plate tested in PQT on Roma Plastilina® No. 1 front and back male torso-shaped backing materials in accordance with the submission requirements in Table 18 and test methods outlined in Section10.5.3. If this plate has been separately tested for PQT to these methods in the previous six months, additional testing is not required.Each plate construction (with or without certified soft armour) shall have independent production thresholds and shall be assessed independently. The performance of the plate element in one construction does not directly affect other constructions using this plate.10.3.5. Extended coverage panelsOne small and one large extended coverage panel shall be submitted for each ballistic protection level and stab protection type. These panels shall have an equivalent certified unformed armour of the same construction that has been be submitted for testing in accordance with Section 10.5.1 and/or Section 10.6.1 for ballistic and stab testing respectively. If this unformed armour has been separately tested for PQT in the previous six months, additional testing is not required.10.4. Pre-test checksOn submission of samples for PQT, the manufacturer shall provide a redacted technical file to the test facility, on approval by CAST. Prior to testing, armour shall undergo inspections and areal density checks in accordance with the methods in Section 5.2.1 and 5.2.2 respectively.Areal densities shall be compared to the original certified values. If there is a deviation of greater than 5% for the whole armour, an investigation shall be commenced and areal densities of the individual layers shall be recorded to investigate following the manual method outlined in Section 5.2.2.Inspection notes and areal densities from these assessments shall be included in PQT reports.
10.5. Ballistic PQT10.5.1. Unformed armourBallistic testing for unformed armour shall comprise a CPA test. This shall be conducted in accordance with methods outlined in Section 6.8.Results of the CPA testing shall be assessed against certification values and graded as red, amber or green based on the criteria outlined in Table 20, illustrated graphically in Figure 32.Table 20: Assessment criteria for unformed armour ballistic PQTGrading schemeOutcome of testActionsRed*V01 (PQT) less than VTESTImmediate repeat of CPA with four additional panels. Outcome must be green. If not, batch to be held and investigation (Section10.9) to be commenced.RedV50 (PQT) more than 10% away from V50 (cert)AmberV50 (PQT) between 5% and 10% away from V50 (cert)Next PQT CPA test, at specified intervals, must be green. If not, follow red grading actions.GreenV50 (PQT) less than 5% away from V50 (cert)Continue with next CPA at specified interval.* Red result regardless of V50 compared with V50 (cert). All other scores assume V01 is greater thanVTEST.
- 10%
- 5%
V50(cert)
+ 5%	+ 10%
Figure 32: Schematic showing PQT grading system from CPA tests (Percentages relate to deviation from V50 (cert))10.5.2. Formed armourFormed armour ballistic PQT shall be conducted using the same procedures outlined in Section 6.6. One large and one small formed protective panel shall be used for each ammunition type. PQT results shall be assessed against the criteria outlined in Table 21..
Table 21: Assessment criteria for formed armour ballistic PQTGrading schemeOutcome of testActionsRedTwo or more perforations of the formed armour.Investigation to be commenced (Section 10.9).AmberOne perforation of the formed armour.Immediate re-test (PQT) must be green. If not, follow red grading actions.GreenNo perforations of the formed armour.Continue with next PQT at specified interval.40These results are concomitant with those for unformed panels. If unformed panels do not meet the requirements of PQT, formed panels cannot be accredited.10.5.3. PlatesPQT for plates shall comprise reduced levels of testing in accordance with Section 6.7. One plate shall be assessed per ammunition type for the certified protection level. PQT results shall conform to the requirements of certification testing (Table 8). If the results do not conform to these requirements, the batch being assessed shall be suspended and an investigation shall commence in accordance with Section 10.9.10.5.4. Extended coverage panelsExtended coverage panels, submitted for ballistic testing, shall be tested in accordance with the test methods and assessment criteria outlined in Section 6.10. If the results do not conform to these requirements, the batch being assessed shall be suspended and an investigation shall commence in accordance with Section 10.9.10.6. Stab PQT10.6.1. Unformed armourPQT for unformed stab resistant armour shall comprise reduced levels of testing in accordance with procedures outlined in Section 7.7. Table 22 outlines the quantities of strikes required for PQT assessment. Knife orientations for strikes have been given in brackets.40 Based on the provision that associated unformed armour meets the requirements of Section 10.5.1.
Table 22: Quantity of strikes for PQT assessments of unformed stab resistant armourNumber of strikesSmall panelLarge panelE1E2E1E2Knife only4(0°, 30°, 45°, 90°)2(45°, 90°)6(2 x 0°, 30°,45°, 60°, 90°)2(45°, 90°)Knife and spikeKnife4(0°, 30°, 45°, 90°)2(45°, 90°)6(2 x 0°, 30°,45°, 60°, 90°)2(45°, 90°)Spike3–4–PQT results shall be assessed against the criteria outlined in Table 23.Table 23: Assessment criteria for PQT stab tests on unformed armourGrading schemeOutcome of testActionsRedOne or more penetrations of a knife greater than 9 mm.Investigation to be commenced (Section 10.9).More than one penetration of a spike.AmberTwo or more penetrations of a knife between 8 mm and 9 mm or one penetration of spike.Immediate re-test (PQT) must be green. If not, investigation to be commenced (Section 10.9).GreenFully meets the requirements set out in Section 7.7.Continue with PQT at specified interval.10.6.2. Formed armourFormed protective panels shall be marked in accordance with methods outlined in Section7.8.2.2 following test methods outlined in Section 7.8. For knife only protection, one large panel shall be assessed in the standard formed armour strike pattern (Figure 16). For knife and spike protection, a large and a small panel shall be assessed, one each for knife and spike resistance testing. The size of panel used for each test shall be selected at the discretion of the test facility and does not always have to be the same for subsequent PQT.The results of the formed armour stab PQT tests shall be assessed against criteria in Table 23. These results are concomitant with those for unformed panels. If unformed panels do not meet the requirements of PQT, formed panels cannot be accredited.
10.6.3. Extended coverage panelsExtended coverage panels, submitted for stab testing, shall be tested in accordance with the test methods and assessment criteria outlined in Section 7.10. If the results do not conform to these requirements, the batch being assessed shall be suspended and an investigation shall commence in accordance with Section 10.9.10.7. Construction assessmentFollowing PQT, all panels shall undergo construction assessments in accordance withSection 8. Any irregularities in construction shall be photographed and reported to CAST along with the panel for inspection.The results of these assessments shall be provided alongside PQT test reports.10.8. ReportingReporting of PQT tests shall follow the template provided by CAST.41 This completed report shall be sent to CAST alongside any associated relevant information (e.g. photographs) on completion of tests.All test reports will be protectively marked as ‘OFFICIAL SENSITIVE [COMMERICAL]’ with handling instructions ‘for use by the Home Office, stated manufacturer and stated test facility only, unless otherwise agreed by all parties’ and kept on record for a minimum of five years.10.9. PQT investigationsPQT investigations shall commence following non-conformance to PQT test requirements. In these circumstances, production of this armour shall be suspended and the PQT batch must not be sold prior to the conclusion of the investigation.The test facility shall provide CAST and the manufacturer with results from the testing. Test panels relating to the non-conformance shall be sent to CAST.It is the responsibility of the manufacturer to conduct an investigation and adequately satisfy CAST, with evidence supporting, of the rationale for the failed tests. The investigation shall identify and address the cause of the failure and whether other batches may have been affected.If the cause of failure is determined and the issue relates only to the PQT batch, this may be rectified before the batch undergoes a full re-test (certification).If the cause of failure cannot be determined and the non-conformance only relates to the PQT batch, this batch shall be quarantined/destroyed. Internal quality records shall be sought in such investigations. The next batch produced shall undergo a full re-test (certification).If the issue relates to any other armour batches, the manufacturer shall inform customers to whom the affected armour has been sold. If the cause of failure is determined, this may be41 To be issued to test facilities in a separate file, as required.
rectified before the batch undergoes a full re-test (certification). It is the manufacturer’s responsibility to ensure that issues with any armour already distributed to their customers are rectified. Evidence of rectification shall be provided to CAST.If, however, the cause of failure cannot be determined or rectified, the affected batches shall either be upgraded with additional protective materials (and undergo a full re-test – certification) or withdrawn. In this case, the frequency of PQT shall be increased to once every year, until satisfactory results are achieved over a period of three years.
11. In-life monitoringILM is a scheme designed to assess the continued performance of in-service armour throughout its product life expectancy. Certified body armour shall enter ILM if the manufacturer fails to provide satisfactory evidence, on submission of the technical file, of product performance for the duration of the product life expectancy (outlined in Section 3.6.1) or the manufacturer decides to opt in to the scheme.Any armour subject to ILM, from the date of certification, shall be periodically sampled every two years throughout the duration of the product life expectancy. The initial sampling period shall begin from the date of certification. The armour shall be sampled from operational officers and shall always be the oldest in-service armours available post certification (based on serial numbers). It is the manufacturers’ responsibility to acquire and replace in-service armours required for ILM. The manufacturer shall independently arrange testing at a CAST accredited independent test facility.The selected test facility shall be responsible for conducting testing in accordance with methods outlined in this standard. After testing, test reports shall be sent to CAST for review.The submission requirements are detailed in Table 24. Unformed armour, submitted for ballistic ILM, shall be assessed in a CPA test. A minimum of three panels shall be used in such assessment with the results being assessed against the criteria outlined in Section 10.5.1.Formed armour shall be assessed using a single panel against the criteria outlined in Section10.5.2. One plate (with associated soft armour backings) shall be submitted per ammunition type and assessed against Section 10.5.3. For unformed armour, these panels shall be the largest available that meet the sampling criteria. Formed armour and plates shall be submitted with consideration given to the sizes of the torso mannequins for formed armour and plates, respectively (Section 4.3.1).
Table 24: Armour submission requirements for ballistic ILMProtection levelPanel typeSizesCPA (minimum quantity – largest panels available)SmallMediumLargeFBFBFBHO1 or HO2Unformed423Formed1HO3Plate432HO4Plate3SG1Plate1F = front panel; B = back panel; dark grey boxes – no panels required.Unformed armour, submitted for stab ILM, shall be conducted on a single unformed protective panel assessed against the criteria outlined in Section 10.6.1. Formed armour ILM stab testing shall be conducted on a single formed front panel and assessed against the criteria outlined in Section 10.6.2. As with ballistic testing, for unformed armour, these panels shall be the largest available that meet the sampling criteria. Formed armour shall be submitted with consideration given to the sizes of female-shaped torso mannequins (Section 4.3.1).ILM shall be conducted in accordance with the methods and assessment criteria for the respective tests outlined in PQT (Section 10). If PQT requirements are not met an investigation shall commence in accordance with Section 10.9. Additional operational armour may be required for assessment.42 Formed armour shall be assessed through associated unformed armours in a CPA test.43 Plates shall be supplied with associated soft armour submitted in certification.
Appendix A: Declaration of constructionDeclaration of Construction of Body Armour to Home Office Body Armour Standard 2017When completed this document will be classified“OFFICIAL SENSITIVE [COMMERCIAL] for use by Home Office and stated manufacturer only, unless agreed by both parties”Manufacturer:	Model Reference:	Protection Level:Complete details of material to be included in technical file and associated data sheetsLayer numberMaterialStrike FaceBody SideCover descriptionCarrier description[Manufacturer] hereby declare that all body armour produced as model [Armour Model Unique Identifier] will comprise the same materials and construction as specified in the construction declaration and technical file. All armour will meet the labelling requirements in accordance with Section 3.4 of Home Office Body Armour Standard (2017) Publication No. 012/17.Signed and dated [Manufacturer]:
Appendix B: Materials data sheet: technical requirementsThe following provides a guide as to the details required as part of the submission of body armour for certification testing. This data shall be supplied as an attachment for each individual material used in armour construction. Where applicable, the following information is required.Woven elementsYarn:ï Fibre typeï Name (trade name and reference)ï Producer (manufacturer and specific location)ï Construction/filament countï Twist level    ï Linear density in Tex (grams per 1,000 m of yarn) Woven fabrics:ï Material producer (manufacturer name and specific location)ï Fabric structure (e.g. plain woven)ï Areal densityï Thicknessï Material coating/surface treatments: International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (IUPAC) International Chemistry Identifier (InChITM)ï Quilting and construction details (e.g. orientation, spacing, stitch type, adhesives)Felt elementsï Felt typeï Name (trade name and reference)ï Producer (manufacturer and specific location)ï Areal densityï Thicknessï Production detailsFoam elementsï Foam typeï Name (trade name and reference)ï Producer (manufacturer and specific location)ï Densityï 
ï Thicknessï Production detailsThermoplastic elementsï Thermoplastic typeï Name (trade name and reference)ï Producer (manufacturer and specific location)ï Densityï Thicknessï Material coating/surface treatmentsï Adhesives usedï Production detailsMetallic elementsï Metal used, including alloy ratiosï Metal supplierï Material producer (manufacturer name and specific location)ï Manufacturer’s referenceï Metal hardness (Vickers scale)ï Link size (wire diameter and link internal diameter)ï Production details (e.g. welding methods)Pressed fibre plate elements (e.g. UHMWPE)ï Name (trade name and reference)ï Producer (manufacturer and specific location)ï Linear density in Tex (grams per 1,000 m of yarn)ï Layer countï Adhesives usedï Production detailsCeramic elementsï Ceramic typeï Name (trade name and reference)ï Producer (manufacturer and specific location)ï Thicknessï Densityï Hardness (Vickers scale)ï Adhesives usedï 
Appendix C: CAST accredited test facilities
Besuchussamt MellrichstadtLohstrasse 597638 Mellrichstadt GermanyTel: +40 (0)9776 7050-0
Cranfield University Shrivenham SwindonWiltshire SN6 8LAEnglandTel: +44 (0)1793 783192

HP White Laboratory Inc. 3114 Scarboro Road Street MarylandMD 21154 USATel: +1 (410) 838 6550
NTS7447 West 33rd Street North WichitaKS 67205 USATel +1 (316) 8321 600
Appendix D: Test equipment and consumablesItem DescriptionReferenceSupplierEngineered test knifeHome Office Engineered Knife (01-07164)Contact CAST for informationEngineered test spikeHome Office Engineered Spike (06-04419)Contact CAST for informationStab sabot damper discs50 mm diameter, 30 mm thickness LD33 Plastazote® foamWater jet cutLD33 Damper DiscsAlanto Cellular Foam SolutionsUnit 21/23 Regal DriveWalsall Enterprise Park WalsallWS2 9HQUnited KingdomTel: +44 (0)1922 723740Email: sales@alanto.co.ukStab composite backing materialsAL52N Expanded Nitrile / NBR SpongeDK1735 Expanded Firm Neoprene Sponge RubberLD24 Plastazote® foam AL55 solid natural rubberAlanto Cellular Foam SolutionsUnit 21/23 Regal DriveWalsall Enterprise Park WalsallWS2 9HQUnited KingdomTel: +44 (0)1922 723740Email: sales@alanto.co.uk7.62 x 39 mm surrogate test roundPT11009EPA Manufacturing Ltd.6 Market Place Tuxford Nottinghamshire NG22 0LJTel: +44 (0)1777 871310Email: bm@epgroupuk.com
Item DescriptionReferenceSupplierShaped torso mouldsMale torso front mould: 454-20753M-001-01Male torso rear mould: 454-20753M-011-01Large female torso mould: 454-20753M-021-01Small female torso mould: 454-20753M-031-01Forward Composites Ltd.Forward House9-10 Clifton Road Huntingdon Cambridgeshire PE29 7EJUnited KingdomTel: +44 (0)1480 432623Email: info@forwardcomposites.comItem DescriptionReferencePolyartTM paperArbjobex Headquarters 32, Avenue Pierre GrenierBoulonge Billancourt cedex 92517FranceStandard matt white 140/75 140 g.m-20.175 mm thicknessRoma Plastilina® No. 1Sculpture House Inc. 3804 Crossroads Parkway Fort PierceFL 34945 USAGrey-Green 2lb blocksPlastiline® 40Herbin-Seuer SA G-Lalo138 Quai de Jemmapes 75010 ParisFrance5 kg tubes (Ivory)
ISBN: 978-1-78655-335-5© Crown copyright 2017This publication is licensed under the terms of the Open Government Licence v3.0 except where otherwise stated. To view this licence, visit nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence/version/3 or write to the Information Policy Team, The National Archives, Kew, London TW9 4DU, or email: psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk.Where we have identified any third party copyright information you will need to obtain permission from the copyright holders
24/03/2025  Homicide problem-solving guide - Guidance overviewhttps://www.college.police.uk/guidance/homicide-problem-solving-guide/homicide-problem-solving- guide-guidance-overview
Page
Homicide problem-solving guide - Guidance overviewA problem-solving approach to homicide prevention. First published19 October 2022Homicide problem-solving guide 2 mins readA problem-solving approach to homicide uses the intelligence, skills and networks of policing and its partners to understand and respond to persistent, common crime problems.Using the homicide problem-solving guideThis homicide problem-solving guide consists of four stages that should be undertaken in sequence (scanning, analysis, response, and assessment). It’s advisable to move backwards and forwards within the process as new information comes to light and new ideas emerge.You should use this guide alongside the homicide and near-miss problem profile. The problem profile template is for completion by force analysts. It can help you to understand your local problems and inform your response.We’ve also provided examples of good practice, guidance, resources, and academic research outlining what works throughout the homicide prevention framework.AcknowledgementsWe would like to thank the author of this guide, Professor Iain Brennan (University of Hull).TagsHomicide Crime reduction
Home  Crime, justice and the law  Your rights and legal supportHow to make a freedom of information (FOI) request
OverviewYou have the right to ask to see recorded information held by public authorities.The Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) and Freedom of Information (Scotland) Act (FOISA) give you the right to see information.If you ask for environmental information, your request will be handled under the Environmental Regulations (EIRs) or Environmental Information (Scotland) Regulations (EISRs).Environmental information includes things like carbon emissions or the environment’s e?ect on human health.You do not need to tell the organisation which law or regulations you’re making your request under.Personal informationThere is a di?erent way to make a request if you want information that an organisation holds about you. This includes things like your health records or credit reference files.
Related contentData protection
 NextOrganisations you can ask for informationView a printable version of the whole guideExplore the topicYour rights and legal supportElsewhere on the webFreedom of Information Act 2000Services and informationGovernment activityBenefitsEducation and learningDepartmentsBirths, death, marriages and careEmploying peopleNewsBusiness and self-employedEnvironment and countrysideGuidance and regulationChildcare and parentingHousing and local servicesResearch and statisticsCitizenship and living in the UKMoney and taxPolicy papers and consultationsCrime, justice and the lawPassports, travel and living abroadTransparencyDisabled peopleVisas and immigrationHow government worksDriving and transportWorking, jobs and pensionsGet involved
Home  Crime, justice and the law  Reporting crimesHow to report antisocial behaviour
OverviewAntisocial behaviour is behaviour that causes harassment, alarm or distress to other people.It can include both criminal and non-criminal behaviour, for example:  noisy neighbours vandalism  gra?ti fly-tipping and littering discarding syringes or needles  threatening, harassing or inconsiderate behaviourLocal police, councils and social housing landlords work together to deal with antisocial behaviour. They do this di?erently in di?erent areas.Who to report antisocial behaviour toWho you report antisocial behaviour to depends on the type of behaviour it is and where it takes place.Report it to: the police - if you feel threatened or you think the behaviour could be breaking the law y our council - if it a?ects your local area y our landlord - if you live in a council or housing association home and it’s happening in or near your buildingThere’s a di?erent way to report antisocial behaviour in Scotland and in Northern Ireland.
Related contentReport a crimeGet support as a victim of crimeReport a noise nuisance to your council Resolving neighbour disputesNoise from roads, trains or planes
 NextReport antisocial behaviour to the policeView a printable version of the whole guideExplore the topicReporting crimesNoise, neighbours, pets and pestsServices and informationGovernment activityBenefitsEducation and learningDepartmentsBirths, death, marriages and careEmploying peopleNewsBusiness and self-employedEnvironment and countrysideGuidance and regulationChildcare and parentingHousing and local servicesResearch and statisticsCitizenship and living in the UKMoney and taxPolicy papers and consultationsCrime, justice and the lawPassports, travel and living abroadTransparencyDisabled peopleVisas and immigrationHow government worksDriving and transportWorking , jobs and pensionsGet involved
24/03/2025  Humanitarian aspects in emergency managementhttps://www.college.police.uk/app/civil-emergencies/disaster-victim-identification/humanitarian-aspects- emergency-management
Page
Humanitarian aspects in emergency managementThis page is from APP, the official source of professional practice for policing. First published23 October 2013 Updated6 August 2018Written by College of Policing Disaster victim identification 1 min readAn emergency or major incident will include a wide range of humanitarian aspects. Responders should provide appropriate care and support for everyone affected by an emergency. This may include survivors of an incident, family and friends of survivors and the deceased, those responding to the emergency, and the community living and working in the area affected. These activities should address the needs of people affected by emergencies, providing psychological and social aftercare and support in the short, medium and long term.For further information, see Cabinet Office (2016) Human Aspects in Emergency Management: Guidance on supporting individuals affected by emergencies.Back to Disaster victim identification overviewTagsCivil emergencies
24/03/2025  Humanitarian assistance and police documentation teamshttps://www.college.police.uk/app/civil-emergencies/civil-contingencies/humanitarian-assistance-and- police-documentation-teams
Page
Humanitarian assistance and police documentation teamsThis page is from APP, the official source of professional practice for policing. First published23 October 2013 Updated3 April 2024Civil contingencies 6 mins readThe police service has a vital role in the initial provision of humanitarian assistance, which must be balanced against their responsibilities of investigation and identification. It should follow the principles outlined in the Charter for families bereaved through public tragedy.The humanitarian response to any emergency or major incident is a package of care, with a range of agencies working together.The exact focus depends on the scale and nature of the incident and the impact on people and their needs. It is likely to include: basic shelter information about what has happened  financial and legal support emotional support advice and direction on how to get further assistance communication facilitation, allowing people to meet or talk to each other  a point of contact for ongoing support and adviceThe strategic commander should recognise the importance of humanitarian assistance and support to people directly and indirectly affected by an emergency or major incident. This support should be provided through a series of emergency reception centres.There are four types of emergency reception centre:
1. survivor reception centres2. rest centres3. family and friends’ reception centres4. humanitarian assistance centresFurther guidance on humanitarian assistance is contained in the Human aspects in emergency management guidance (Cabinet Office, 2011) on supporting individuals affected by emergencies.Types of emergency reception centresSurvivor reception centre (SuRC)The police service is the lead agency for the SuRC, supported by the local authority.A SuRC is a secure place, located outside the inner cordon but generally close to the scene. It is a place of safety for survivors not requiring acute medical treatment, away from the immediate consequences of the incident.Documentation of survivors can be completed for input into the Casualty Bureau and Major Incident Public Portal (MIPP). Immediate humanitarian assistance can be provided by the local authority at this location.Rest centreThe local authority is the lead agency for rest centres.This location is a building pre-designated in emergency plans or used by a local authority as temporary accommodation, including overnight, for people evacuated or homeless because of an emergency or major incident. It offers safety and shelter for those who may have been asked to leave their home, work or elsewhere and not to return. These shelters are designed for people that were not part of the incident and have no injuries from it.Until evacuees can go home or find alternative accommodation, they should receive practical and wellbeing support from the local authority and supporting agencies.Police may attend rest centres to gather information from evacuees.Family and friends’ reception centre (FFRC)The police is the lead agency for FFRCs, supported by the local authority.A FFRC is usually located away from the scene of an emergency or major incident. It provides a secure place for the family and friends of people directly involved in that incident, where they can access information and humanitarian assistance. They can also complete relevant documentation processes.Humanitarian assistance centreHumanitarian assistance centres offer medium to long-term support to people directly or indirectly affected by the emergency or major incident.
Humanitarian assistance is provision to meet the psychological and social welfare needs of people affected by emergencies (Eyre, 2008). This assistance is required in the short, medium and long term. People’s needs will vary considerably over the timeframe, as will the form of assistance they require. This requires a multi-agency, flexible approach.HospitalsAs part of the initial investigation, commanders should consider sending police documentation teams to any receiving hospital to collate all relevant information.Police documentation teamsCollecting personal information is an important activity within reception centres. The principles of the Data Protection Act 2018 apply to all personal information collected during an emergency or major incident, even though this may be challenging under the circumstances.A police documentation team should consist of a team leader familiar with the Major Incident Public Portal (MIPP) and recognised documentation procedures. The team leader will report to the tactical commander until or unless a senior identification manager (SIM) is appointed, when they will report to the SIM as part of the overall identification and investigation process.Local force policy should stipulate which supervisory and responder roles should complete the national training package for police documentation teams.EvacuationThe purpose of evacuation is to move people and other living creatures away from an actual or potential danger to a place of safety via a safe route (see Evaluation and shelter guidance, HM Government 2013).Any decision to evacuate should be taken based on the safety of the public and emergency responders. An alternative to evacuation is to require people to shelter inside a place of safety, such as a building.A decision to evacuate or shelter should be taken by the tactical coordinating group, based upon assessments made by the fire and rescue service and other specialist advisers. The scientific and technical advice cells (STAC), if convened, may also provide advice.The final decision may rest with the police tactical commander on occasions where a prompt decision is required. Where a large-scale evacuation is being considered, the SCG may be required to make a policy decision on the scale and nature of an evacuation.Family liaisonThe purpose of police family liaison is to ensure the most effective investigation possible into the death of an individual in a mass fatality incident and potential support to survivors. This will be assisted in an emergency or
major incident by the early implementation of a family liaison strategy. The SIM will determine the family liaison strategy in consultation with the senior investigating officer (SIO), to ensure a coordinated approach to the families of any deceased.The strategy should include the criteria for sending family liaison officers (FLOs) to families believed to have lost a relative in the incident. To ensure fair and consistent use according to need, the SIM may appoint a family liaison coordinator (FLC). The FLC will be responsible for the use of FLOs in line with the policy determined by the SIM or SIO.Victims of terrorism unit (VTU)The VTU within the Home Office has been established to coordinate responses to and learning from terror attacks at a government level. The VTU ensures government departments work together to provide coordinated and effective support to victims.As part of this, British citizens affected by terrorist attacks at home or overseas can obtain support from GOV.UK. See Helpline and support: victims of terrorism. This includes information on: where to seek advice and assistance following a terrorist attack official helplines and support services available to victims, survivors, witnesses, family members and all those affectedFirst responders can also obtain support and advice from GOV.UK if they have been affected by a terrorist attack. See Support and advice for first responders: victims of terrorism.Where the VTU responds to an incident, they can communicate with local resilience forums (LRFs). Their work is closely coordinated with the work of the Humanitarian Assistance Steering Group (HASG), in line with the Human aspects in emergency management guidance.Back to Civil contingencies overviewTagsCivil emergencies